THIRTEEN YEARS IN THE
LIFE OF AN ELEPHANT FAMILY

CYNTHIA MOSS

in USA • $14.95 in Canada

sa»b

FAWCETT
COLUMBINE I

“A prose-poem celebrating a species from which
we could learn some moral as well as zoological les*
Ron Grossman, Chicago Tribune

\

vO

780449 "903629

y

cr'

Critical acclaim for Cynthia Moss
and her Elephant Memories
“She conveys, more realistically than any other popular field
account I have read, the day-to-day minutiae of collecting infor¬
mation. . . . Ms. Moss tells the story in a style so conversational,
so free of academic jargon, that I felt like a privileged visitor
riding beside her rickety Land-Rover as she showed me around
the park.”
Sarah Blaffer Hrdy
The New York Times Book Review

“Her accounts are laced with beautiful vignettes describing
individual elephants as they are born, mature, and die. Moss
offers a glimpse into a marvelously complex society where kin¬
ship is the thread connecting the lives of elephants.”
Natural History

“Her findings are extremely interesting: about elephant love
and breeding; about elephant family attachments, which seem
to survive death . . . and startling discoveries about elephant
communication.”
The New Yorker

“Immensely readable and moving.”
New York Daily News

ALSO BY CYNTHIA MOSS

Portraits in the Wild

ELEPHANT
MEMORIES

Cynthia Moss

Fawcett Columbine

•

New York

In memory of the matriarchs in my family
unit, my grandmother Berthe Therese
and my mother, Lillian; and to the
present matriarch, my sister Carolyn.

A Fawcett Columbine Book
Published by Ballantine Books
Copyright © 1988 by Cynthia Moss
All photographs in the book were taken by Cynthia Moss
except where indicated.
Drawings by David Pratt
Diagrams by Lizjarvis
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American
Copyright Conventions. No part of this book may be re¬
produced or utilized in any form or by any means, elec¬
tronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or
by any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the Publisher. Published in the
United States by Ballantine Books, a division of Random
House, Inc., New York, and distributed in Canada by
Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 88-92233
ISBN: 0-449-90362-1
This edition published by arrangement with William
Morrow and Company, Inc.

Manufactured in the United States of America
First Ballantine Books Edition: May 1989
10

987

6

5432

Acknowledgments
Sn a project covering more than 14 years, there have been many
people and organizations that have contributed generously in a vari¬
ety of ways. Without some of them the Amboseli Elephant Research
Project would never have started and would not be continuing today.
Others have contributed more indirectly but just as significantly.
I would like to start by thanking the Kenya government for allowing
me and my colleagues access to their elephants, which they have wisely
held in trust for all the world to enjoy and for a few of us fortunate
ones to study. In particular I would like to thank the Office of the
President and the National Council of Science and Technology for
research clearance and the former Kenya National Parks and the
present Wildlife Conservation and Management Department for per¬
mission to work and reside in Amboseli National Park. I have had a
long and happy relationship with the Wildlife Department, and
among the people that have been particularly helpful over the years I
would like to thank Perez Olindo, who, as director of Kenya National
Parks, first gave permission for the study to begin, and Daniel Sindiyo,
director of WCMD, and David Mbuvi and Fred Pertet, deputy direc¬
tors, WCMD, for their cooperation and interest in the subsequent
years. In Amboseli itself I appreciated the kindness, hospitality, and
generosity of the wardens, but in particular that of Joe Kioko and his
wife, Christina, and Bob Oguya and his wife, Julia. The Kenya Rangeland Ecological Monitoring Unit has been the willing and very helpful
local sponsor for the project and for this I owe my gratitude to David
Andere, the director.
The project would never have begun without financial sponsorship
and I am forever indebted to the support I have received from the
African Wildlife Foundation. That support has been more than just
financial; it has been a statement of faith in me throughout the years.
Without AWF I would not have been able to carry on for as long as I
have. Both the Washington office and the Nairobi field office have
backed me up logistically and administratively, providing a firm base
for the project since its onset. Those in the Washington office I would
like to thank are the presidents over the years, John Rhea, Robinson
Mcllvaine, Robert Smith, and Paul Schindler, and vice-president Di¬
ana McMeekin, and secretary/treasurer Elizabeth McCorkle. In Nai¬
robi my thanks go out to everyone in the office who has helped in so
many ways—field directors Frank Minot, Robinson Mcllvaine again,
Robert K. Poole, and Sandy Price; program officer Rob Olivier; ad¬
ministrative assistants Ronnie Hunter and Sue Heather-Hayes;

6

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

accountants Netty D’Souza and Doreen McCullough; the staunch core
of the office, Mary Metebo; and last but in no way less appreciated,
Mukunjuro Gichoba and Timothy Gitau. They all made the sometimes
stressful and tedious bureaucracy of running a project far smoother
and easier by their assistance.
Other organizations and many individuals have also supported the
Amboseli project financially. The New York Zoological Society gener¬
ously funded my study for three and a half years and I would like to
thank William Conway, George Schaller, and Archie Carr III. Individ¬
uals have in many ways been my most important sponsors; some have
been loyal donors for years. They truly keep the study going and to
them I owe a huge debt of gratitude. I will list some of the major
donors with their foundations, if applicable, in alphabetical order:
George A. Binney; Robert B. Glynn; Paul Hirsch; Charles Jackson, Jr.;
Scott McVay (W. Alton Jones Foundation); Park East Tours; Richard
Phippen (Hurdle Hill Foundation); Audrey Sheldon Poon (Merlin
Foundation); Edmund Pratt (Pfizer Corporation); Denise and Sioma
Schiff; Paul Simon; Mrs. Herman Wouk (Abe Wouk Foundation); and
Richard Weatherhead (Midgard Foundation). Many others helped both
financially and with publicity in response to my appeal to replace my
Land-Rover and tent and, as I hope they all know, their efforts were
greatly appreciated.
Support comes in many forms, much of it not financial. Many
people in the United States, England, and Africa have helped me in
immeasurable ways by their friendship and hospitality. In the United
States I would like to thank the following people for their kindness
over the years: Kate Coleman, Bob and Joan Donner, Bob and Pat
Glynn, Mariana Gosnell, Harriet Huber, Michael Johnston, Jan and
Carolyn Long, Barbara Maltby, Penelope Naylor, David Teitelbaum
and Wendy Weil. In England I would like to thank Robert Hinde and
Patrick Bateson for their hospitality at Cambridge University, Duncan
Mackinder for sorting out my vast mounds of data with his outstand¬
ing computer skills and Richard Laws for his support. In Africa, I must
first thank Iain Douglas-Hamilton for instilling in me a fascination
with and concern for elephants. I would also like to thank the other
elephant researchers in Africa and India who have shared their ideas
and discussed their results with me. In Nairobi my friends have been
exceptionally helpful and encouraging during my years of field re¬
search, data analysis, and book writing; I would like to thank Serafina
Auma, Jared Crawford, Nani Croze, Virginia Finch, Andrew Hill,
Robert Malpas, Sandy Price, Mark Riley, Kes Hillman Smith, and

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Truman Young. Special thanks are due to Conrad Hirsh and Debbie
Snelson for their companionship, care, and patience, and for all the
delicious meals they cooked for me during the final year of writing.
The production of the book has been greatly aided byjilo Quraishy
of Photomural, who has developed and skillfully printed all my photo¬
graphs since the study began. David Pratt and Liz Jarvis provided the
lovely line drawings, endpapers, maps, and diagrams. I would also like
to thank those who gave permission for their photographs to be used
in the book: Harvey Croze, Joyce Poole, Marion Kaplan, Nicolai Canetti, and Athi-mara Magadi.
In Amboseli, where companionship, tolerance, and a sense of
humor are all important, my friends have meant a great deal to me
over the years. Their support and goodwill have been a very important
element in keeping the long-term elephant project going. The lodge
managers and staff have been helpful in many ways and I would like to
thank David and Gillie Jackson, Gerry Sauer, Tamsin Corcoran, Pat¬
rick Njoroge, David Munguti, and Timothy Thuo of Amboseli Lodge;
Tony Pascoe, Othoo Onyango, Jane Shabaan, and Morris Anami of
Serena Lodge; and Mercy Sakawa of the Kajiado County Council.
Others in Amboseli who have been good friends are David and Joyce
Maitumo, Karenkol ole Musa, Kasaine Nkurupe, Daniel Nkurupe,
Simon Ndungu, and Jama Sulieman. I also want to thank the women
in the offices for their friendly assistance: Elizabeth Kitunka, Lucy
Mtutua, Margaret Pertet, and Dorcas Saita. Fellow researchers living in
Ol Tukai have provided stimulating discussion and friendship: Susan
Alberts, Jeanne and Stuart Altmann, Jennifer Dillon, Glenn Hausfater,
Lynne Isbell, Jeanne Meade, Amy Samuels, Jeff and Bev Walters, and
Richard Wrangham.
Closer to home in the campsite I have shared many golden days and
starlit evenings with people who have the same love of Amboseli. My
good neighbors, who always came to the rescue in times of crisis or
simply entertained me, have been Kay Behrensmeyer, Bob Campbell,
Stuart Cunningham, Rob Foley, Chris Gakahu, Seido Hino and his
Nippon TV crew, David Klein, Moses Kumpumula, and Vicki Morse.
In my camp I must first thank Masaku Sila and Peter Kumu Ngande
for keeping my body and soul together. Without their hard work and
skills the camp would not be the peaceful, beautiful home that it has
become for me, and my appreciation for what they have done is
boundless. I would also like to thank several assistants, students, and
short-term visitors who have worked on the project: Claire Heffernan,
Katy Payne, Titus Masaku, M. E. Mwange, Joan Riback, and Nellie

7

8

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Sakawa. Norah Njiraini and Soila Saiyielel, who have joined the proj¬
ect recently have added greatly to the productivity of the elephant
research and to the general well-being of the project and I am very
grateful for their hard work and enthusiasm. My campmates, who have
worked on nonelephant projects, have been very important to me, and
through sharing the camp I have made some lifelong friends: Marc
Hauser, Wes Henry, Cynthia Jensen, and Robert and Dorothy Seyfarth
have all been helpful, amusing, and stimulating companions.
Last but most important, I want to thank my colleagues on the Amboseli Elephant Research Project. Jonah Western and Harvey Croze
were instrumental in getting the project going and I appreciate their
faith in me and support from the beginning. Colleagues Joyce Poole,
Keith Lindsay, Phyllis Lee, and Sandy Andelman have all been close
friends and companions. They have given me a great deal of assistance,
for which I can never thank them enough. They have helped in field
work, in collecting long-term records, in maintaining the camp, in
analyzing data, in writing papers, in reading manuscripts, and in many
other ways. Sharing the camp brought us close together, but sharing
the elephants added another dimension to our relationship. No one
who gets to know the Amboseli elephants as individuals is untouched
by that knowledge and it has bound us irrevocably. For me it is a very
good feeling to know that there are others who care about the ele¬
phants as I do, who will work to ensure that there is a viable future for
them, and who, if there is a fight to save Amboseli’s elephants, will be
beside me. For that I thank my colleagues with all my heart.

Contents

Acknowledgments

5

Introduction

15

I.

An Amboseli Day

1973-1975

II.

Drought

1976

41

III.

Migration

1977

63

IV.

Mating

V.

Social Relationships

VI.

Births and Babies

VII.

Elephants and People

VIII.

Flexibility

1978

19

89
1979
1980
1981

1982

119
145
175
203

IX.

Population Dynamics

1983

229

X.

Life Cycle and Death

1984

255

XI.

Future Generations
and Beyond

1985—1986

Epilogue

December 26, 1986

283
319

Amboseli Elephant Research Project Publications 325
Index

529

Tuskless 9 (1962-

Taabu 8 (1969-1978)

i

Tia 9 (1950-1984)

AMBOSELI national park

If the elephant vanished
the loss to human laughter,
wonder and tenderness would
be a calamity.

— V. S. Pritchett
reviewing The Roots of Heaven

/

Introduction

T

here is a small national park called Amboseli at the base of
Kilimanjaro in southern Kenya. In its 150 square miles live a
variety of wild animals: lions, leopards, cheetahs, rhinos, gi¬
raffes, buffaloes, zebras, wildebeests, and elephants. The wild¬
life has lived there for several thousand years; I have lived
there for most of the last 14 years, carrying out a study of the
elephants.
Elephants are very special animals: intelligent, complicated,
intense, tender, powerful, and funny. I consider myself im¬
mensely fortunate to have spent so much time with them. I
have followed the lives of Amboseli’s elephants through
droughts to periods of superabundance, through times of
heavy poaching and great losses to times of peace and relative
security. I have watched them give birth and I have watched
them die. I have observed young females reach sexual maturity
and mate for the first time and young males leave the security
of their families and strike out on their own. I have seen the
grand old matriarchs leading and defending their families and

15

16

INTRODUCTION

I have also seen them lose all dignity and run around in play
with their tails curled up over their backs and a wild glint in
their eyes.
After so many years with elephants I wanted other people to
know them, enjoy them, and care about them as I have. I
wanted to share my knowledge and experiences, and therefore
I have written this book. I think it is important to point out that
this is not a tale of adventure about human hardship and
bravery in the face of Africa’s heat and dust and large,
dangerous animals; in other words it is not about how I
survived alone in the bush with 600 wild friends. It is about the
elephants’ lives, how they survived or succumbed to droughts,
poachers, Maasai warriors, disease, injuries, tourists, and even
researchers. It is about their families, their “friends,” their
mates, and their offspring; and their good times and bad times
through the seasons and the years. I have merely gone along
with them — a spectator at the banquet or a witness to less
happy events — in the role of voyeur, not as a participant. I am
there, of course, but only as observer, interpreter, scientist,
conservationist, philosopher, and sometimes just as a lover of
elephants who puts aside the tools of the trade and simply
enjoys being with them.
The book concentrates on the lives over the last 13 years of
one extended family of elephants. In following the histories of
these individuals from the time I met them to the present I
hope to share with my readers the richness and complexity of
elephant life.
The chapters run chronologically, starting in 1973, and each
consists of three parts. At the beginning of each is a semifictionalized scene in the lives of the family I have chosen. The scenes
are based on a combination of actual events that I have
witnessed, circumstantial evidence such as the disappearance or
injury of an animal, and purely made-up material based on my
knowledge of elephants. For example, in Chapter IV I describe
the mating behavior of two of the females in the family. I saw
one of the females in close consort with the male I mention for
a few hours on one of the days she was in estrus and saw her
chased by other males on another day. I did not see the second
female in estrus but I know that she had to have mated around
that time because she gave birth 22 months later. I have seen

INTRODUCTION

dozens of matings and have watched and recorded the behavior
of well over 100 females in estrus. With these data I have been
able to work out the typical course of events for both young and
more experienced females in estrus. In another example, in
Chapter IX I did not actually see the death I describe, but I
have watched sick and dying elephants, and I have seen family
members trying to lift and hold up a sick companion. Thus
what I have done is taken basic events in the life of the family
that I know had to have happened and filled in the blanks based
on thousands of hours of observation of these and other
elephants. I feel justified in creating these scenes because most
people cannot fill in those blanks, but by my doing so I hope to
bring my readers close in with the elephants, watching and
imagining with me those events in their lives.
In most of the chapters the introductory scene is relatively
short. The remainder of each chapter consists of two elements.
One is the theme, such as Mating, Social Organization, or
Population Dynamics. I discuss these topics in detail, often
using examples from the family I have concentrated on. The
third part relates observed events and developments in the lives
of the family and usually ends with a list of family members at
the end of the year that the chapter has covered. Sometimes the
themes and events are interwoven, and thus there is not a rigid
structure to the second and third parts of each chapter.
Like a family saga or a soap opera, there are many names to
remember and the relationships are sometimes complex. As an
aid to keeping track of who is who I have included a family tree.
There are also two maps to keep one from getting lost among
the Maasai names and a diagram of the multi-tiered social
organization.
I have always said that watching elephants is like reading an
engrossing, convoluted novel that I cannot put down but I also
do not want to end. I hope in this book I have conveyed
something of that feeling and that my readers will understand
why elephants are so fascinating and so special and why they
are deserving of respect and consideration.
Cynthia

Moss

Nairobi
March 1987

17

Chapter 1

An Amboseli Day
1973-1975

En the early morning light, the large gray forms moved slowly,
deliberately, and nearly silently along a well-worn path amongst
lava boulders and small thorny Balanites trees. They walked in
single hie with a large female with long, upcurved tusks at the
lead, many calves of varying sizes and ages along with more
adult females in the center, and a straight-tusked, ancient, but
immensely dignihed female at the rear. Behind them rose the
overwhelmingly dominant feature of the landscape — the
19,340-foot snow-capped peak of Kilimanjaro. The elephants
headed north, away from the mountain; they walked without
stopping to rest or feed, as if they had an appointment at a
prearranged place.
Eventually they emerged into a habitat of open pan with no
trees and little other vegetation. Here the quiet sluff, sluff of
their feet kicked up the fine alkaline dust and their outlines
became hazy. They did not linger here either, but continued on
until abruptly the dry, bare ground gave way to lush, green
vegetation interspersed with open water dotted with and sur-

21

22

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

rounded by myriad water birds: ducks, geese, ibises, herons,
cranes, plovers, jacanas, and many more. Other animals gath¬
ered along the edge of the swamp: zebras, wildebeests, reedbucks, waterbucks, and buffaloes. The elephants kept on their
course, ignoring these smaller species, who stepped discreetly
out of the way.
On reaching the swamp, the elephants spread out. Some
began to feed immediately while still walking, snatching up
large mouthfuls of the dark, green Cynodon dactylon grass,
others continued on a straight course, and all arrived together
at a channel of clear running water. Each of the adult females
dipped the tip of her trunk into the stream, sucked the water
up into her trunk, lifted her head up and back, placed the
trunk in her mouth, and let the water flow back down her trunk
and down her throat while swallowing at the same time. Most of
the calves used the same technique, but one young calf was not
yet adept with his trunk and he knelt down and drank with his
mouth.
When they finished drinking some went on into the swamp
and started feeding in earnest, while others walked over to a
depression where a mud wallow had formed. The adults
splashed themselves with the dark, glutinous mud by first
picking it up in the curve of their trunks and then flinging it
onto their chests, backs, sides, and heads. The mud hitting their
bodies made a sharp, wet slapping sound. Soon they turned
from a light gray to mostly glistening black. The calves, showing
less restraint, waded right into the wallow and flopped down on
their sides and then writhed and wriggled in the mud until one
side, including head, ears, and eyes, was completely covered in
mud. Then they sat up and flopped over to the other side.
Young calves took the opportunity to climb on the older ones as
soon as they were down, and in the process, got covered in mud
themselves. Eventually there was a great heap of youngsters
completely filling the mud wallow. Slowly they disentangled
themselves and struggled out of the mud wallow, slipping and
sliding up the small bank.
The calves joined the adults, who were now moving deeper
and deeper into the swamp. There the elephants found grasses,
sedges, including papyrus, and succulent creeping herbs. They
ate steadily, building to a rhythm: first twisting the trunk

AN AMBOSELI DAY

around a bunch of vegetation, pulling to one side and ripping
the bunch free, then placing it in the mouth, and immediately
reaching for more as they chewed. Some kinds of plants came
out by the roots and with these the elephants bit off the part
that was palatable and let the other drop. The small calves
found less that they could handle, only young shoots here and
there and tender creepers. These younger calves also had some
trouble trying to follow their mothers through the dense
vegetation and deep water and at times they had to swim from
one clump of vegetation to the next.
The elephants fed continuously until midday, when they
moved to higher, dry ground, where they found a bare patch of
dusty soil. They scooped the dust up in their trunk tips and
blew it out over their heads and backs. Now they gathered
together in a tight group, nearly a circle, standing close
together, some touching. One female rubbed her head against
the shoulder of the old, straight-tusked female. A calf leaned
and rubbed against the leg of his mother. First one calf lay
down, then three more subsided to the ground and lay flat on
their sides. The females’ heads hung down and their trunks
became limp and stretched out until the tips touched the
ground. Two of the females rested their trunks on their tusks.
One simply draped her trunk over her left tusk. The upcurved
female neatly curled her trunk like a snake and rested it on
both her tusks. A half-grown calf placed his trunk on the back
of a sleeping calf. All became quiet and breathing deepened.
The elephants slept for about 40 minutes, the calves soundly,
but the adults much more lightly, occasionally opening their
eyes, gently flapping their ears, or swishing a trunk or tail at an
annoying fly. A young adult female was the first to show signs
of stirring. She stepped forward a few feet and started dusting.
Then the calves stood up and synchronously most of the
members of the group defecated and urinated. Still they stood
there as if waiting. Then the ancient female made a very long,
soft rumbling sound, raised and flapped her ears against her
neck and shoulders, letting her ears slide down with a rasping
sound, and set off. This was the signal they had been waiting
for and all the others followed after her.
They traveled north, forming a column two or three abreast.
Once again they seemed to have a purpose in their movement

23

24

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

and direcdon. Some of them raised their trunks in the air,
sniffing the wind. They headed toward a channel of the swamp
where the water continued to flow above ground. Feeding near
the channel were two more groups of elephants. The original
group moved steadily in their direction. When they arrived at
the first of the two stationary groups there was a discreet
reaching of trunks in each other’s direction by some of the
members, but the upcurved female and the old female ignored
these elephants and walked on past toward the second group.
When they were about 50 yards from this group, the up-curved
female rumbled — a different, higher-pitched, and louder
rumble than the signal the old female gave after they woke.
This sound produced an instant reaction in the new group. The
members raised their heads, lifted and spread their ears, and
produced loud, throaty rumbles. At the same time the elephants
in both groups began to secrete a clear liquid from the temporal
glands on the sides of their faces. More answering rumbles
came from the original group and then both started striding
rapidly toward each other. When they were 20 yards apart they
broke into a run and came together in a turmoil of earflapping,
rumbling, screaming, trumpeting, clicking of tusks together,
entwining of trunks, spinning and backing, and urinating and
defecating. Their temporal gland secretions were streaming
down their faces and they reached their trunks toward each
other’s glands. The upcurved female pushed through the
milling calves and went straight to a large female with a big tear
out of her right ear. They lifted their heads together and
clicked tusks while entwining their trunks and rumbling deeply.
The elephants continued to greet one another, with accom¬
panying loud vocalizations, for another four to five minutes.
When they calmed down the adults and older juveniles started
to feed. The younger calves, still stimulated by the interactions,
investigated each other for a while longer. Eventually, they too
began to feed again. The two groups had now merged into one
and all fed together peacefully. They moved into the deeper
part of the channel and fed in this area for another two hours.
Around 4:00 a huge lone bull elephant, carrying his head
high and his chin tucked in, appeared from the east. His
temporal glands, also located midway between his eye and ear
on each side of his head, were streaming with a thick, viscous

AN AMBOSELI DAY

fluid. The sheath of his penis was a greenish color and
continuously dripped urine. He gave off an extremely strong,
sharp odor. When he was still well over a hundred yards away
the females in the group raised their trunks and sniffed in his
direction. They stopped feeding, rumbled, and warily watched
his approach. He continued to come, and as he got closer he
slowed his pace, lowered his head slightly, and nonchalantly
draped his trunk over one tusk. The females visibly relaxed,
and when he arrived in the group, they rumbled excitedly and
some of the younger females turned and backed in toward him.
The bull went to each female in turn, and placed the tip of his
trunk on her vulva, which hung down low between her hind
legs, facing the ground. If she had urinated he touched the
urine with the tip of his trunk. With most of the females he
quickly moved on; with a few he smelled the vulva or urine for
longer and then placed his trunk in his own mouth and stood
very still as he analyzed the odor and taste. After he had tested
all of the females, he started to feed, but after about half an
hour he left and moved on to the other group in the area,
where he also inspected the females. Here too he found
nothing to interest him and he moved on, heading out of the
swamp to the west.
Toward the late afternoon the new aggregation of females
and calves began to orient toward the south and slowly amble in
that direction while they fed. They followed the course of the
channel for a while but eventually came up onto higher ground
and out into the grasslands. They now joined the second group
that had been feeding nearby, but they exchanged no greetings.
They became a single broad front of elephants moving and
feeding through the grass. As the sun was setting they reached
a small grove of young Acacia xanthophloea trees. Some of the
animals fed on these, carefully removing the thorny branches,
and then manipulating them with trunk, tusks, and feet to
remove the bark from the larger branches or to bend the thorns
in one direction before placing the smaller branches in their
mouths.
While the adults were more or less stationary, the calves took
the opportunity to play. The young juvenile males from all
three groups came together to spar vigorously in pairs. Two
faced each other, lifted their heads, and came gently together

25

26

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

nose to nose. In this position they felt each other’s heads and
mouths, with their trunks winding around and through their
tusks. They began to push against each other, moving backward
and forward until one broke away and backed off. They came
together again and pushed until one was shoved onto his
backside. They separated, backed up, and this time ran at each
other and met with the rich chunking sound of ivory against
ivory. Finally one broke away and turned and ran with the
other following. The first one whirled around, lifted his head,
and spread his ears and his pursuer stopped short, watched the
other for a moment, then picked up a stick in his trunk and
threw it in the air. The other young male lowered his head and
approached and the sparring began again. Several pairs of
young males sparred in this way, while the younger calves
imitated them, chased one another, climbed on each other, or
simply ran around for no apparent reason. They squealed,
bellowed, and trumpeted, but the adults paid them no attention
whatsoever.
Slowly, one by one, the adults stopped feeding and moved
away from the trees. They stood at the edge of the small grove
orienting south. Once again they waited until the old female
rumbled before setting off. Then they formed a line and
headed toward the mountain. The younger calves joined their
mothers, but several older calves continued to play. Suddenly
finding themselves abandoned, they broke off from sparring to
catch up with the others. They ran with a loose, floppy gait,
shaking their heads from side to side, letting their ears flap
against their necks, and curling their tails up high over their
backs, all the while trumpeting with a loud, pulsating, nasal
sound. As they neared the group one of the young males
whirled and playfully attacked another and they began a new
sparring match. Once again they got left behind and once again
they ran trumpeting to catch up. The young animals ran and
played, and ran and played all across the pan. When they
reached thicker vegetation they started to bash through bushes,
beating them with their heads and tusks. Even some of the
young adults joined in this game and the sounds of their
trumpets and screams rent the otherwise quiet evening.
Suddenly, all together, as if by signal, the elephants were
quiet and still. They cautiously lifted their trunks, smelled the

AN AMBOSELI DAY

air, and then took off at a very fast run, in tight formation, with
the calves close to their mothers and the larger adults at the
front and rear. They ran fast and silently with no trumpets or
screams. Nearly a half a mile away, silhouetted against the last
light in the western sky, three Maasai warriors moved across the
plain with their characteristic ground-eating, loping gait. Over
their shoulders they carried six-foot-long spears.
The elephants ran for three quarters of a mile before slowing
to a walk. They stopped, still bunched together, turned, and
faced in the direction from which they had come, smelling the
wind. One or two gave a sharp toss of the head, which made
their ears crack like canvas sails. Several of them extended
trunks toward each other, and most of the mothers reached for
their babies and felt them with their trunks. After a while they
relaxed.
They were back in the area of lava and Balanites trees that the
original group had passed through in the morning. Soon the
aggregation broke down into subgroups and spread out to
feed, looking for grass and small shrubs and herbs growing
among the rocks. After a while the upcurved female and the
ancient female and their calves and associates were on their
own once again. Even they were split up into subunits as they
continued to feed and move slowly toward the mountain. Every
ten minutes or so one of the adult females rumbled a low
contact call and listened for an answer from the other group
members keeping in touch. By midnight they had covered only
a few miles. One by one they stopped feeding and reformed
their group, gathering around the two big females. First the
young calves, then the older ones, and finally the adult females
all lay down and went to sleep. In the moonlight they looked
like huge gray boulders, but their deep, peaceful snoring belied
the image.
Around 4:00 a.m. they began to stir and struggle up onto
their feet. They urinated, defecated, rubbed their eyes, and
scratched themselves with their trunk tips or picked up a stick
and used it to scratch their bellies or between their front legs
where the huge elephant ticks lodged. One female found a
convenient tree stump and rubbed herself against it in an
ungainly posture. There seemed to be no hurry to go anywhere,
but eventually the upcurved female walked off and started to

27

28

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

.

feed and others followed. Their general movement was to the
northwest, away from the mountain again.
The elephants fed until dawn and then started striding out
more deliberately until, like the morning before, they formed a
single hie and walked steadily along a well-worn path heading
toward the swamp.
I first met the big upcurved female and the ancient female on
September 9, 1973. I found them in one of the woodland areas
of Amboseli called Ol Tukai Orok, which means “place of the
dark palms” in Maa, the language of the local Maasai people. I
was in Amboseli for a few days trying to photograph as many
elephants as possible to build up a recognition hie of the
population. I had not seen these animals before and was
pleased to hnd them in a fairly open area where they were
feeding and moving slowly. That meant I could take pictures. I
was also pleased that they appeared to be very tolerant of my
vehicle.
First I counted the group several times and got 11, then 12,
then 13 three times in a row. It is more difficult to count
elephants than one would imagine. They are large animals and
so one assumes that one would be unlikely to miss any, but it is
because they are so large that it is easy to miss the ones that are
hidden behind the bulk of the nearer ones. After three counts
of 13 in different combinations I was satisfied that there were
“13 exact” as I wrote in my held notes.
I then tried to work out the age and sex structure: There
appeared to be four medium-to-large adult females (anywhere
from 20 to over 60 years old), two young adult females (about
11 to 19 years old) and seven calves (newborn to about ten years
old) of various ages and both sexes. I wrote this down and
started photographing. Ideally I wanted to photograph each
animal’s head and ears from the left side, right side, and head
on. This is easier said than done, and typically I had to be
content with the left sides of some, the right sides of others, and
head-on shots of still others. The important thing was to keep
very accurate notes of each photograph so that I did not assume
that the right ear in picture #33 went with the left ear in picture
#35 when they were actually two different animals. My notes
looked like this:

AN AMBOSELI DAY

Right side upcurved female
Right side 2 V2 yr calf with her
Left side = 15 yr old F with a big V notch out of each
ear
Left sides large female with long straight tusks
and her 2 yr calf

— 33
—34

— 35
— 36

I had learned these techniques from Iain Douglas-Hamilton, a
pioneer in the use of individual recognition in wildlife research.
He studied the elephant population in Lake Manyara National
Park in Tanzania and was the first person to use photographs
of elephants so he could recognize large numbers of individuals
over and over again. By the end of his four-and-a-half-year
study he knew almost every individual in a population of over
500.1 worked for Iain for eight months in 1968 and for shorter
periods in 1969, 1970, and 1971, assisting him in field work and
analysis of data. It was at Manyara that I got my “eye” for
elephant ears, some imprinted so indelibly on my mind that I
can still remember them to this day.
It is primarily the ears that I use to identify individuals. First
of all, African elephants’ ears are big and conspicuous. Second,
they are rarely smooth along the outer edges. Elephants usually
have holes, nicks, and tears on the edges of the ears. In
addition, the veins in the ears are often prominent and the
pattern they form is unique, as accurate a means of identifica¬
tion as human fingerprints and a lot easier to see. Thus if an
elephant has completely smooth edges to its ears with no holes,
then the vein patterns can be used. In any case a combination
of nicks and holes and vein patterns guarantees accurate
identification once a good photograph has been taken.
I also use a variety of secondary characteristics. Tusk length,
circumference, shape, and configuration all help to make an
elephant look individual. However, tusks often break and when
they do the general appearance of the elephant can change
markedly. Other oddities such as scar tissue, warts, growths,
injured legs and trunks can also be used as secondary aids, but
these too can disappear or change. In the end, I always rely on
the ear pattern, which changes only gradually over the years
and then usually only one section at a time. The veins, of
course, remain the same throughout life.

29

30

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

I discovered in Manyara that once I got to know an elephant
I was not using any one of these characteristics in my initial,
immediate recognition of the elephant. Instead I got to know the
whole elephant: its size, shape, posture, the way it moved, stood,
or carried its head. I would see an elephant from over 100 yards
away and say to myself, that’s so-and-so, and then when I drove
up to it I would double-check its ears. It is a bit like recognizing
a human friend who is walking away from you on the other side
of the street. You know that friend by a combination of many
features, some of which you would not even be able to describe.
When you call out and the friend turns around, you are positive
who it is. When I get closer to an elephant and I see its ears, I too
can make a positive identification.
When I started my own study of elephants in Amboseli
National Park in Kenya in 1972,1 was fortunate to have had the
experience of working with Iain, who not only taught me how
to identify elephants but also how to work around them, how to
estimate their ages, and how to study their social organization
and behavior. I was doubly lucky in that, in the hrst two years
of the Amboseli study, I had, as a partner, Harvey Croze, who
had recently completed an ecological study of the elephants of
the Serengeti National Park in Tanzania. He had just become a
lecturer in the zoology department of the University of Nairobi
and hoped to continue his elephant work in Kenya. I wanted
nothing more than to study elephants again after my experi¬
ences in Manyara, and when David Western, an ecologist who
had worked in Amboseli for several years, suggested that
someone should study the elephants in Amboseli, Harvey,
whom I knew slightly, and I decided to join forces and work
together.
In the hrst two years of the study Harvey and I went to
Amboseli separately or together whenever we could get away
from our various jobs and responsibilities. Harvey managed to
obtain some funds for the project from the university and from
the East African Wild Life Society. I used my own money that
I had saved. It was by necessity a part-time study. Our primary
goal during those years was to complete a recognition hie on
the elephants. Once we knew individuals we could gather data
on social organization, daily activities, ranging patterns, and
reproductive behavior.

AN AMBOSELI DAY

On that first occasion when I met the upcurved female and
the old female, I was in Amboseli on my own for a few days.
Two weeks later I was back with Harvey. On the morning of
September 23 we found the upcurved female and some other
elephants that we had not seen before. They were just about to
move into the deep part of one of the swamps and we barely
had time to count them and take a few photos. This swamp,
called Enkongo Narok, which means “black eye” in Maa, is
actually a relatively narrow water course with thick vegetation
growing in water up to eight feet deep. This does not deter the
elephants, however. They plunge right in up to their ears and
feed in the deep water for hours. On this morning, the
elephants quickly disappeared among the reeds and we had to
leave them. By that date in 1973 we knew it was a typical
pattern for the elephants to come into the swamps in the
morning, feed there for most of the day, and then move out
into the bushland in the late afternoon or evening. We went
back at three o’clock in the afternoon and were lucky enough to
find the group just coming back out onto the shore.
Now we had ideal conditions for taking photographs of the
individuals. A large female with a V-shaped notch out of her
right ear with a small flap hanging down from the lower part of
the notch was feeding nearby on a Suaeda monoica bush. Near
her was a young tuskless female, about eleven years old. We
had already seen a few other tuskless females in the Amboseli
population and were curious to know how many there were and
if tusklessness or one-tuskedness ran in families. Next we
photographed a very pretty female with almost completely
smooth ears. I use the word pretty here with no hesitation,
because anyone who watches elephants on more than one or
two occasions can easily see that some elephants are better¬
looking than others, at least to the human eye. It has something
to do with proportions: the size and set of the ears; the length
and width of the trunk in relation to the head; the size, shape,
and carriage of the head; the length of the legs; the curve of the
back; the general body shape; and perhaps most striking, the
particular configuration of the tusks. Apparently it is not a
totally subjective impression. Inevitably two or three people
watching a herd of elephants together will agree that that one
over there is “beautiful,” this one is “pretty,” that one is

31

32

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

,

“funny-looking,” or even this one is “ugly.” So in the beginning,
when trying to sort out a group of elephants, one cannot help
using these overall impressions as an aid in remembering who
is who. With the pretty female was a funny little calf who had
one left tusk and a tiny, stunted right tusk that looked more like
a tooth than a tusk. On the spot he was called “Right Fang” by
Harvey.
Next we photographed a very handsome, medium-sized
female with relatively smooth ears. She had with her a young
male calf only a few months old. As soon as this female got
onto dry ground her calf hurried forward to his mother’s
teats. She put one leg forward and he suckled vigorously for a
minute and a half on her right side, then quickly ducked
under her chest and suckled on the left side for another 15
seconds until she moved. They had been in the swamp for
over four hours and he had probably not been able to suckle
during that time.
The upcurved female I had photographed two weeks before
now emerged from the swamp, followed by several calves. We
took more photographs of her and noted that she had a very
neat slit in the middle of her right ear. I drew a picture of it in
my notes:

I expected to see the old female with the long straight tusks
and the young female with the two V notches, but when all the
elephants had come out of the swamp we could see that they
were not present.
After the elephants had fed for a short while on the bushes
at the edge of the swamp, we heard three low rumbles and then
they started moving west along the edge of the swamp. We
counted 18 animals, including an adult male who surrepti¬
tiously tested the females as he walked along.
The elephants came to a causeway, which had been built

AN AMBOSELI DAY

across the Enkongo Narok water course so that vehicles could
pass to the western side of the park. Elephants could easily cross
the swamp by moving through the water, but sometimes they
used the causeway. On this day, it appeared that the elephants
decided to avoid getting wet in the swamp again. According to
my held notes, at 5:25 they walked up onto the road and started
down the narrow track, which had low walls on both sides to
prevent cars from driving into the water. Coming along the
causeway from the east side was a lioness, followed by a tourist
vehicle. The lioness was about halfway across the causeway
when she noticed the elephants. She stopped short and started
to turn back, but the vehicle was in her way so she turned again
and started trotting toward the elephants, who got alarmed and
moved back. Not for long, however, The torn-eared female
came forward with her head high and her ears spread and the
lioness instantly crouched down with ears flat against her head.
The torn-ear was now joined by the tuskless young female, k
calf, the slit-eared upcurved female, and the adult bull. They
stood their ground facing the lioness. My notes read:
1732 Torn ear starts moving toward the lioness and car.
Lioness gets up and retreats around car. Tuskless and
younger calf follow, then bull, then slit ear. Others except
female with first year calf come up on causeway.
1740 The elephants mill about — car still on causeway
unable to cross.
1743 Car backs up and [only then] elephants turn around
and come back off causeway on our side.
1745 Bull last off.
1746 1 min later the lioness returns down the causeway with
two cars following her. She turns upstream. The elephants
are downstream.
The elephants had held up the lioness and traffic for over 20
minutes. The torn-eared and slit-eared females were endeared
to Harvey and me from that point on.
We managed to photograph several groups of elephants on
that trip to Amboseli. When we returned to Nairobi we spent

33

34

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

the following weeks developing films, making contact sheets,
and then choosing the best pictures and making prints of the
individuals. For some reason I loved this part of the work. It
was like a huge puzzle, trying to recognize individuals, putting
left ears with right ears, assigning calves to this female or that,
determining the exact number and composition of each
elephant group. Harvey and I would spend hours in the
darkroom developing, printing, washing and drying, then I
would take the photographs home and pore over them using a
magnifying glass and with the aid of our notes try to sort out
all the ears. It was immensely satisfying when a group started
to take form and I was sure I knew who its members were. If
we were very, very lucky and saw a group completely on its
own two or three times with good conditions for taking
photographs, we could feel confident that we knew all the
adult females in the group and had a good idea of how the
various youngsters fit in.
Since we both had studied elephants before, Harvey and I
were familiar with their basic social organization. Wherever
they had been studied, it had been found that elephants lived in
groups, commonly called “family units,” which consisted of
related adult females and their immature offspring, ranging
from newborns to calves up to about ten years old. Each family
was led by the oldest female, the matriarch. Male calves left the
family on reaching sexual maturity at anywhere from 10 to 15
years old. Female calves stayed in the family and began to breed
at around 11, producing their first calf at about 13. Adult males
associated with the females and calves only infrequently. In
addition, Iain Douglas-Hamilton had found that family units
often had special relationships with certain other family units in
the population and they spent a great deal of their time
together. He called the families making up such an association
a “kin group.”
Thus Harvey and I knew more or less what to expect in terms
of basic social organization. However, a careful scientist tries
not to approach a subject with preconceived ideas, so we
rigorously took down data on which elephants were present
each time we saw a group and did not just start lumping
elephants into family units because other people had found
that social system. But the accumulated data on who spent time

AN AMBOSELI DAY

with whom soon revealed that the Amboseli elephants did,
indeed, also live in family units.
A family unit in Amboseli averaged nine to ten in size and the
members formed a tight-knit coordinated group. When we
found a family group it was almost invariably synchronized in
its activities. That is, all the members would be feeding, or
walking, or resting, or drinking or mud wallowing. It was rare
to find members doing several different things. Also the
individuals were usually within a few yards or less of each other.
A female and her youngest calf were frequently within a few
feet of each other and often touching, while her older calves
were never far away. When the group was feeding, the indi¬
viduals spread out a bit; but while traveling or resting or
standing, they were closely bunched. They appeared to be very
tactile animals, often touching each other with trunks, or
leaning or rubbing on one another.
The social bonds among family-unit members were obviously
very strong, and one of their manifestations was the frequent
greeting of one another. Often after they had been spread out
feeding and the group coalesced, individuals would greet one
another with a special posture and rumble. The greeters would
first raise their heads, lift their ears and spread them, tuck their
chins in, and then rumble loudly and throatily while flapping
their ears. Sometimes greetings were more excited and intense
and they gave us an idea of the degree of attachment between
individuals and eventually between family units.
Harvey and I recorded that certain families spent more time
with each other than with other families in the population, just
as Iain had described in Manyara. When these families were
together they moved in a coordinated manner and synchro¬
nized their activities. When they rested, they all gathered
together in a tight-knit bunch, touching and leaning on one
another. When they came together, they performed the greet¬
ing ceremony. Eventually I decided to call the association
between the families that seemed to have special relationships a
“bond group.” Although I suspected that the families making
up these groupings were one extended family, I did not
definitely know if the members were related, so I decided to use
bond group rather than Iain’s term kin group.
Once we started working out the families, we had to devise a

35

36

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

.

designation system for the individuals and family units. Num¬
bers would be simplest, but experience had taught us that
numbers were hard to remember once one had several hun¬
dred. “Now is she F 121 or F 132?” We knew that we would
eventually be putting data into a computer so we decided to
give each of the females a three-letter code derived from an
easily rememberable name. As we photographed more and
more individuals and met new groups, we started to give each
tentatively determined family a letter of the alphabet. So the
first family we ever photographed back in September 1972 was
called the “AA” family. All the females in that family were given
names starting with the letter A: Annabel, Alyce, Amy, Alison,
Agatha, Amelia, Abigail, and Wart Ear. Wart Ear? Well, yes, we
hit a snag. We had been calling this female Wart Ear (because
she had a large wart at the top of her left ear) ever since we first
met her family, and by the time we felt confident enough to
assign the family a letter and name the females, her name had
stuck. We took the first three letters of the names and used
them as their computer codes: ANN, ALY, AMY, ALI, AGA,
AME, ABI, and WAR. Alyce was spelled with a y instead of an
i so she would have a different code from Alison.
We tried to choose common English and European names
for the elephants because they were the easiest for us to
remember. I am very thankful that we did so because today,
with over 500 elephants named, it would have been very
difficult to remember any obscure names. To this day I cannot
remember who is who among four young males with Russian
names in the “V” family. Vladimir, Vostok, Vasily, and Vronsky
are forever confused in my mind and I always have to look them
up before writing them down. Also, and this is a key, I was not
the one who named them — they were named by colleagues
later in the study. Naming is a fascinating phenomenon and a
surprisingly powerful process. Somehow by naming something
one possesses it, almost creates it. At the same time one feels a
closer relationship to that thing. I did most of the naming in the
early days of the study, but Harvey named a few of the animals,
and although he has had little to do with the study in the last ten
years I still think of Tania, Filippa, Justine, and Jezebel as
“Harvey’s elephants.” When Filippa died in 1982 it was Harvey
I thought of and wanted to tell.

AN AMBOSELI DAY

Purists might say that it is dangerous naming animals in a
scientific study because one might associate names with people
one has known and then impose that person’s characteristics on
the animal. I know that none of us who have worked on the
project has found this. An elephant is so much its own being
that it soon overshadows any association with a name. I,
however, have the opposite problem now. When I am intro¬
duced to a person named Amy or Amelia or Alison, across my
mind’s eye flashes the head and ears of that elephant. I am also
constantly looking for new names for elephants. I have been
through four “names for babies” books and am now on a
dictionary of saints. When I am introduced to someone with an
unusual name that I have not used yet, I get excited and ask her
to spell it for me. Books sometimes help. Harvey and I were
both reading Marquez’s One Hundred Years of Solitude in 1974
and found the names particularly suitable for elephants, and so
we have Remedios, Ursula, Renata, Pilar, and Aurelia (the
feminine form of the main character’s name).
It took several more trips to Amboseli before we were
tentatively able to sort out the families with the torn-eared
female, slit-eared upcurved female, and old straight-tusked
female. Repeated sightings of the same individuals led us to
conclude that the torn-eared female, whom we named Torn
Ear and estimated to be about 40 years old, was the matriarch
of a small family which consisted of four animals, herself and
three offspring, including the tuskless 11-year-old female,
whom we called Tuskless. Even though we had not reached the
letter T yet we made this family the “T” family because of the
names already given. Then, because we were not sure how
many families were involved or if it was one big family we gave
all the other females who associated closely with Torn Ear T
names.
The handsome female with the first-year calf seemed to
associate very closely with Torn Ear, but we were not sure if she
belonged to the same family. Harvey named her Tania. We
thought she was probably about 30 years old. She appeared to
have three sons. The slit-eared female, who we thought was
nearing 40, definitely had a very close relationship with the old,
straight-tusked female, who looked as if she had to be at least
50. It was difficult to tell if they formed one family or two. We

37

38

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

named the slit ear Slit Ear even though it was not a “T” but it
seemed so obvious, and we named the old female Teresia.
By the end of 1974, when Harvey had to give up his partici¬
pation in the project, we had seen these individuals and their
calves in various groupings with each other and on their own on
24 occasions. I continued to work part-time on the study for
another year, and eventually, with some reservations I decided
that the Ts consisted of four family units, and that these four
families had close relationships with one another, forming a
bond group, which very likely was one extended family. I des¬
ignated them the TA, TB, TC, and TD families. I also named
more individuals in the families: the pretty mother of Right Fang
was named Tia; the young female in the TCs was named Tess;
a second adult female in the TDs was named Trista; and the two
younger females in the TDs were named Tina and Tallulah.
Only two changes occurred in the composition of these four
families since the time I had first met them. In March 1974
Torn Ear gave birth to a male calf, the only birth I recorded
among the Ts during 1974 and 1975. The second change was
the appearance in the TA family of a seven-year-old female
calf. The appearance of this calf, whom I named Tonie,
remains something of a mystery to this day. I have one picture
of her from 1973, when she and individuals I assume were her
mother and older sister excitedly greeted the TAs and TBs. I
never saw that adult female and the older calf again and I
assume they died. Judging by the intensity of the greeting, they
must have been closely bonded to the TAs and TBs, possibly
even members of one of those families. Whatever the previous
history, from late 1975 Tonie remained with the TAs as an
integral member of the family.
At the end of the part-time study in 1975 there were 23
animals in all in the four T families. The structure and
composition of the families looked like this (calves indented
under a female’s name were known or thought to be hers):
ta

Torn Ear
1 V^-year-old male calf born around March 1974
4—5-year-old female calf
8—9-year-old male calf
Tuskless — a female around 13 years old

AN AMBOSELI DAY

Tonie — a 7—8-year-old female (probably the daughter
of a female who died early in the study)
tb

Tania — the handsome female we photographed in
1973 with the first-year calf
2- year-old male calf
6— 7-year-old male calf
13-14-year-old adolescent male

tc

Slit Ear — the upcurved slit-eared female
4- year-old female calf
7— 8-year-old female calf
Tess— 11—12-year-old female (probably Slit Ear’s
daughter)
Tia— the pretty, smooth-eared adult female
Right Fang—4—5-year-old male calf

td

Teresia — the old, straight-tusked female
3— 4-year-old male calf
7—8-year-old female calf
Tina — a young female around 13 years old
Trista — an adult female (probably Teresia’s
daughter)
5— 6-year-old male calf
Tallulah — the young female with the big V out
of each ear, 11—12 years old

39

I

Drought

1976

[Q/lit Ear walked up behind Tia with her ears spread slightly.
Tia looked back over her shoulder and quickly moved ahead,
leaving the small patch of grass where she was feeding. Slit Ear
immediately went to the same patch and fed on it for a few
minutes. Tia found another clump of dry yellow grass and
began to graze again. She twirled her trunk around the short
brittle stems and kicked at the base with her front right foot.
Dust and grass chaff flew up as a clump was dislodged. Tia beat
the clump against her knee, knocking more dirt and dust and
dry bits from it. She then placed what remained in her mouth
and as she chewed she tackled another small clump with trunk
and foot in an unbroken rhythm. Spread out all around her
were the other members of her family and Teresia’s family. All
the adults and older juveniles fed in the same manner: twirling,
kicking, beating, and chewing, and the only sounds were the
thuds and slaps of their grazing and the steady flapping of their
ears against their necks and shoulders.
The 13 elephants fed for another half hour. In that time Slit

43

44

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

Ear supplanted Tia twice more and the young female Tess
once. There was no protest from them; they just moved on in
search of other small patches of grass. They ate with no
apparent enthusiasm. All their movements were slow and
deliberate in what appeared to be an effort to husband their
energy. They were hungry in a dull, lethargic way, but there
was little food available and what there was was mostly unpa¬
latable and of little nutritional value. The younger calves, Slit
Ear’s and Teresia’s, born in 1971, were still suckling from their
mothers, but the milk was no longer as rich as it had been and
there was not enough of it to satisfy them. They fed on
vegetation as well, but they were not as adept at handling the
short dry grass. Slit Ear’s calf got under the chin of her older
sister and ate the grass that she loosened or dropped. Teresia’s
calf stuck close to his mother. The older calves who had
recently been weaned — Right Fang and Trista’s son — were
having the hardest time. They were not getting any extra from
their mothers and had to fend for themselves. As each day of
the dry season progressed they grew weaker and more tired.
When the two families finished grazing, they rested for a
while under the shade of some yellow-barked Acacia xanthophloea trees. After another half hour they moved out and
crossed an open stretch of bare, dusty ground to a strip of
acacias. Here the older animals broke off small branches from
the trees and, carefully maneuvering them with foot and trunk,
fed on the twigs, bark, and four-inch-long thorns. The adults
were experienced at handling this potentially dangerous food,
but the younger calves could neither break off the branches nor
manipulate the thorns so that they would not pierce their
tongues, gums, and insides of their mouths. They stood near
their mothers and picked up the smallest twigs and bits of bark.
After browsing on the acacias for nearly an hour, the
elephants walked on west through the strip of trees to an area
of the swamp where it runs like a river through steep banks,
bordered by Cynodon dactylon grass. However, the grass, usually
a major item in the elephants’ diet, was eaten down to bare
stubble and the whole area was covered in the dung of the
animals that had fed there.
Slit Ear led the two families to a place where the bank was less
steep. Each elephant lowered its front legs over the edge, then

DROUGHT

kneeling on its hind legs, worked its way down the bank and
into the water. The water was only a few feet deep and they
were able to cross with no trouble. At the opposite bank they
used the reverse technique, scrabbling up to the top of the
bank, then kneeling on the lip with their front legs and pulling
themselves up over the edge. Teresia and her calf were the last
to cross. The calf made it down and across the water but had
difficulty getting up the opposite bank. When Teresia walked
on to join the others, the calf gave a low rumble of distress, and
Teresia, Tina, and Tallulah spun around and came back over
to the bank with their ears spread forward and trunks out.
They reached for him as he struggled over the lip, rumbling to
him. When he made it up, he shook his head and let out a long,
loud rumble and the females answered with a softer sound,
touched him with their trunks, and then they all turned and
walked on to the others.
They were now on an island of hard ground, covered again
in eaten-down stubble. Slit Ear did not attempt to graze here
but crossed to an area of slower-moving water with thick
papyrus and other swamp vegetation. The adults and older
juveniles lowered themselves in and began to feed. The
younger calves joined them, but the vegetation was coarse and
unpalatable. They ate whatever they could find.
No sooner had they begun to feed when they heard the
sound of bells of Maasai cattle and the whistles and shouts of
their herders. The elephants lifted their heads, raised their
trunks, and immediately turned and began to run out of the
swamp. No trumpets or rumbles could be heard, just the grunts
of the animals as they struggled out of the mud. They raced
across the island, slid down the bank into the water, and
hurried through, their momentum carrying them up the other
side. They ran, with ears laid flat against their shoulders and
tails held up and out, back through the acacia strip, across the
open dusty plain, and into an area of mixed acacia and palm
trees. They finally slowed their pace when they were about a
mile from the swamp. They stopped, formed a defensive circle,
flapped their ears, and raised their trunks once more, smelling
in the direction from which they had come. It was nearing
midday and temperatures were already high and the running
had heated their bodies. Trista put her trunk into her mouth

45

46

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

‘

and with a gurgling sound pulled her trunk back out and
sprayed behind her ears with liquid. The others followed her
example, some reaching several times into their mouths, suck¬
ing water from their stomachs, and spraying their heads, chests,
and necks. They then stood flapping their ears rhythmically,
cooling the blood in the surface veins of the ears.
Teresia turned and began walking in a northeasterly direc¬
tion, letting Slit Ear pass her and take the lead. They arrived at
the edge of the woodland where it bordered an open, dusty
pan. Here they rested under some trees, but after a short time
the sound of cattle bells could be heard to the south and the
elephants had to move again. They crossed the pan with Slit
Ear in the lead, and Teresia in her usual place in the rear. They
did not panic this time because the sounds had been from some
distance, but they walked at a fair pace. They passed to the
north of one of the tourist lodges, ignoring it completely, and
eventually arrived at the northern end of the Longinye swamp,
where there was no open water. Here there were many other
groups of elephants spread out feeding on dry grass. To the
south, where the grass was slightly greener from underground
dampness, were several thousand Maasai cattle. The elephants,
along with buffaloes, zebras, wildebeests, waterbucks, impalas,
and Grant’s and Thomson’s gazelles, were concentrated in a
small area where the Maasai did not bring their livestock.
The area still had grass but it was of poor quality. The
buffaloes looked like skeletons with old fur rugs thrown over
them. There were no young among them at all. The adults had
long strings of mucus hanging from their noses, and some had
blood-flecked foam on their mouths. The zebras also appeared
to be suffering. Many had diarrhea and some were painfully
thin, such a rare thing to see in the usually butterball-fat little
horses. The wildebeests were also thin and they all seemed
lethargic. The gazelles, feeding on small herbs and shrubs,
were faring better, but their coats looked rough and dull,
indicating a poor diet. The shoulder bones and hipbones of the
elephants jutted out and their skin hung loosely in folds and
deep wrinkles. Dotted among the living animals were the
rotting carcasses and skeletons of those that had succumbed to
the drought.
When Slit Ear and Teresia and the others had grazed for a

DROUGHT

while they started heading south toward the open water, slowly
moving and feeding at the same time. They were still several
hundred yards away from the water when a mixed herd of
wildebeests and zebras were just approaching the drinking
area. The wildebeests and zebras moved cautiously, stopping,
looking around, stamping their feet, then moving forward
several more paces. About 30 yards up from the drinking place,
hidden in the swamp vegetation, were two lions, a male and
female. To the wildebeests they were gray blobs amongst more
or less gray vegetation. To a human being or another primate
the heads of the lions were distinctly tawny against the darkgreen reeds. The two lions waited patiently with their ears
flattened and their bodies hugging the ground. They had
already been there for half an hour watching the herd slowly
and cautiously approaching.
When the herd of wildebeests and zebras were less than ten
yards from the water’s edge they stopped again and remained
tense and alert. Suddenly a black-headed heron flew up from
the swamp and the herd wheeled and ran back 20 yards. They
stood there for another five minutes, stamping and fidgeting,
before beginning a new approach. They arrived to within 15
feet of the water and stopped again, but now their thirst took
over and the ones in the back began pushing forward, forcing
the leaders to move to the water’s edge. The first animals
entered the water and began to drink, but still the lions remains
crouched and hidden. More animals waded in and spread out
around the original drinkers until 20 or 30 wildebeests and
zebras were drinking in a tight mass. Then the lions made their
move. They sat up, which caused instant pandemonium, hesi¬
tated a few seconds, and then made their sprint while the
animals were turning and running and jostling each other. The
two lions ran into this maelstrom, and the lioness, picking out
one young wildebeest, closed in, grabbed it by the head, and
tossed it to the ground, quickly getting a hold over its mouth
and nose. Before the dust had even settled the male joined her,
holding on to the rear quarters. The lioness kept a firm hold on
the wildebeest’s mouth, preventing it from breathing. There
was barely a struggle, but even weakened by the drought the
animal took several minutes to die. In the meantime, coming
out of various hiding places along the edge of the swamp were

47

48

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

several more lions: another female and two nearly grown cubs.
They began to feed before the female relinquished her hold on
the wildebeest’s nose. Finally, after nearly ten minutes, she
released her grip. She lay panting from her effort and did not
begin to feed at once.
By now Slit Ear and Teresia were about 50 yards away,
coming down to the water’s edge for a drink. Lions cannot kill
an adult elephant, but they can kill a baby, and in general
elephants are intolerant of lions. Teresia in particular was
antagonistic toward lions, probably because of an unpleasant
experience sometime in her long life. The elephants had seen
the running wildebeests and zebras at the edge of their vision
but had not yet seen or smelled the lions. When they got closer,
the wind shifted slightly and they picked up the lions’ scent.
Under certain circumstances the elephants might have just
altered their path and drunk at another spot, but their choice of
drinking places was limited by the Maasai, and in any case
Teresia was not in the habit of letting lions change her plans.
She came forward from her usual position at the rear and
walked directly and quickly toward the lions, with her head
held high and ears spread. The lions were busy feeding,
growling and slurping and in general making a considerable
amount of noise. Teresia was almost upon them before they
noticed her. They took one look and scattered in every direc¬
tion, and then skulked into the reeds to hide. Teresia swung
her trunk at them as they ran away and blew down through her
nose. Her family came up behind her. Less self-possessed than
she in the face of five lions, they, especially the younger
females, were clearly excited. They flapped their ears, gave
sharp shakes of their heads, and let out shrill trumpets. They all
milled about, rumbling and greeting and reassuring one an¬
other with trunk touches. After a few minutes they calmed
down and went on to the water’s edge to drink.
Slit Ear and Teresia continued south in search of slightly
better vegetation, but always keeping the Maasai and their
cattle at a considerable distance. The rains were not expected
for several more months and the food was rapidly disappearing.
The lion incident was a rare distraction in an otherwise
relentless pursuit for food. Teresia was bringing her 50-plus
years of experience into play to try to see her family through

DROUGHT

yet another drought, but some of the places she had gone to
when she was younger were closed off now and there were
fewer choices in the face of this drought.
The lions returned to their kill and squabbled again amongst
themselves for the best pieces, but in a mild sort of way. For the
predators there was a superabundance of food, and their next
meal was waiting just over the rise.
Droughts are not unusual in Amboseli. The name Amboseli
comes from the Maa word empusel, which can mean “salty dust,”
“open plain,” or “barren place,” depending on one’s source. It
is an area of unpredictable climate and changing environment.
By its annual rainfall alone Amboseli would be considered a
near desert. It receives only an average of 12 to 13 inches of
rainfall per year. The area’s rains tend to bypass Amboseli
because of a combination of wind and temperature currents
created by Kilimanjaro. The mountain, less than 25 miles away,
gets most of the rain.
However, Amboseli is by no means a desert. At the same time
that Kilimanjaro prevents rainfall from reaching Amboseli, it
provides water by other means. Underground aquifers run
from the mountain with fresh, clear, cold water which has
percolated down through the porous lava from the very
summit. The aquifers run for about 25 miles to bubble up in
springs in the Amboseli basin. There the water forms channels,
pools, swamps, and marshes, and eventually flows and peters
out onto the plains and into Lake Amboseli.
The name Lake Amboseli has probably enticed and then
disappointed many a traveler hoping to find a lakeside camping
site cooled by fresh-water breezes. The lake is a cracked,
bone-dry pan for most of the year and floods only seasonally
for short periods during the rains and some years not at all.
Present-day Lake Amboseli is the remnant of a much larger
Pleistocene lake that occupied an extensive area right up to the
lower slopes of the mountain. The area that this former lake
once covered, approximately 230 square miles, is commonly
referred to as the Amboseli basin. Within the basin lie the 150
square miles that comprise Amboseli National Park.
Geological evidence shows that during the late Tertiary, a
large river flowed southeast through the park, carried on down

49

50

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

through Tanzania, and emptied into the Indian Ocean at
present-day Tanga. In the late Pliocene or early Pleistocene, 2
to 4 million years ago, Kilimanjaro emerged as a result of
volcanic activity and its bulk and surrounding lava fields
dammed the river, which then had no outlet. Lake Amboseli
was formed. During much of the Pleistocene, the river and
runoff from the surrounding higher ground deposited sedi¬
ments in the lake. Volcanic ash was added by periodic eruptions
on Kilimanjaro. Eventually the lake filled with sediments and
the river was redirected. After several cycles of drying out and
flooding, the majority of the lake became desiccated, leaving
only a portion to the west that floods periodically. This final
desiccation period may have taken place only 5,000 to 10,000
years ago, which is very recent in geological time scales.
The fact that the Amboseli basin was a former closed
drainage lake has had, and continues to have, a profound effect
on the ecology of the area. For thousands of years salts washed
from the soils were carried down the river and deposited in the
lake. When the lake dried up these salts were concentrated in
the soil. Under these conditions only a few salt-tolerant plant
species could grow. Eventually, with rainfall, the salts leached
down through the soil in some areas, leaving the surface soil
less saline. Other plants could then take hold and even trees
began to grow. The salts, however, remained in the water table,
several feet below the surface, and would continue to influence
the vegetation in years to come.
Amboseli’s complex geological history and its current hydrol¬
ogy and rainfall patterns have resulted in an area with a
surprising diversity of habitats and fauna. Within the basin
there are open plains, bushed-grassland, bushlands, woodlands,
and swamps. A great variety of insects, birds, and mammals are
found there. Some of the species live in all the habitats, others
in particular ones, still others in only one. The large mammal
community is both abundant and diverse. There are elephants,
rhinos, hippos, giraffes, buffaloes, zebras, 13 species of ante¬
lopes ranging from the tiny dik-dik to the 1,200-pound eland,
four kinds of primates, three large cats, wild dogs, two species
of hyenas, three species of jackals, several species of smaller
cats, plus mongooses, genets, squirrels, hares, and odd species
such as the aardwolf, zorilla, ant bear, tree hyrax, honey

DROUGHT

badger, and porcupine. Over 400 species of birds have been
recorded in Amboseli.
Man and his livestock have been an important element in the
Amboseli ecosystem for several thousand years. The present
inhabitants of the area, the Maasai people, have been there for
about 400 years. They apparently displaced another tribe of
pastoralists whom the Maasai called the Iloogalala — “people of
the hard teeth” — and who were forced south. The Maasai
were traditional pastoralists noted for their fierce warriors, who
raided far and wide for cattle. These were considered to be
rightly theirs because their god, Lengai, had given them all the
cattle in the world. Their military prowess was well known and
they were feared by other tribes and by ivory traders, slave
dealers, missionaries, and explorers. While Europeans had
explored areas of the interior as early as 1848, few ventured
into Maasailand. In 1883 Joseph Thomson (for whom the
Thomson’s gazelle is named) finally traveled extensively in the
area, apparently while most of the warriors were away on a
long-distance raid.
On that trip in 1883 Thomson passed through what is now
called Amboseli. He found a flat dusty area with no trees but
spectacular views of the mountains all around. In his book
Through Masailand, published in 1887, he noted, “In spite of the
desolate and barren aspect of the country, game is seen in
marvelous abundance.”
In an indirect way the Maasai were responsible for this
abundance of animals. They themselves did not hunt wild
animals for meat or trophies, and they were intolerant of other
tribes hunting in their area. The Maasai warriors sometimes
killed large dangerous animals such as lions, elephants, buffa¬
loes, and rhinos to prove their bravery, but this had little impact
on population numbers. In times of severe drought or cattle
disease, they killed antelopes for meat, but they considered
them God’s cattle, to be used only as a last resort. This attitude
meant that the Maasai have lived more or less in harmony with
wildlife wherever they have roamed. Throughout East Africa
the areas noted for wildlife today are those that are held by the
Maasai or other pastoralists.
Amboseli was recognized very early on as a special wildlife area
when, in 1899, it was included in the Ukamba Game Reserve,

51

52

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

created by the British administration. In 1906 the name was
changed to the Southern Game Reserve, which covered 10,700
square miles. This area was a reserve mostly only in name, but the
Game Department did try to control poaching and to regulate
legal hunting in the area. In the 1930s stricter controls were
brought into action, and Amboseli became popular with hunters,
photographers, and filmmakers because its wildlife had the rep¬
utation of being easy both to photograph and to kill.
In 1948 the reserve was reduced to 1,260 square miles,
named the Amboseli Game Reserve, and placed under the
administration of Kenya’s National Parks Trustees, a parastatal body. In 1961 the same area became a County Council
Game Reserve administered by the Kajiado County Council.
(To avoid confusion, it should be explained that in Kenya there
are two types of protected areas: national parks and reserves.
National parks are administered by the central government,
while reserves are administered by the local county council with
technical advice from the Wildlife Department. Parks are set
aside for the exclusive use of wildlife and tourism, while
reserves allow limited human activity by local people, such as
cattle grazing and timber felling.)
Under county council administration, revenue from a reserve
theoretically goes to the people living in the area in the form of
development projects initiated by the council. In 1964, recog¬
nizing the value of the Amboseli Reserve in terms of income
from tourism, the Kajiado County Council set aside 30 square
miles of the central part of the reserve for wildlife and tourist
activities only, and the Maasai agreed to keep their cattle out of
that area. This situation continued for another seven years,
when, under pressure from conservationists, President Jomo
Kenyatta (Kenya became independent of Great Britain in
December 1963) issued a decree declaring that an area of 150
square miles be set aside exclusively for wildlife and tourism. In
1972 the boundaries were demarcated and the area was gazet¬
ted as government land. Finally, in October 1974, Amboseli
National Park was established and once again came under the
control of the National Parks Trustees. The Kajiado County
Council retained an enclave within the park where the tourist
lodges were situated and still received revenue from both the
park and the lodges.

DROUGHT

The decision to make Amboseli a park was a controversial
one, for the basin swamps were an important dry-season refuge
for the Maasai and their cattle. The Maasai, who had always
shared their whole range with wildlife, were asked to abandon
these swamps, restrict their movements, and still allow the
wildlife to move onto their remaining land. Coincidentally, as
part of a scheme for the whole of Maasailand, the land outside
the park was adjudicated and parceled out into large group
ranches, more or less along clan lines, each run by a committee
of elders. Negotiations were carried out with these new ranch
committees and various promises were made, including alter¬
native watering points outside the park, grazing compensation
fees for the wildlife that came onto the ranches, plus the
provision of a medical dispensary, school, and community
center. During the upheaval of negotiations, relationships
between the Maasai and the government became tense and one
of the results was deliberate spearing of rhinos and elephants as
a form of political protest. Eventually an agreement was made,
but the Maasai were not asked to leave the park as soon as it was
established. A pipeline taking water out to the ridges to the
north and east had yet to be completed.
When I started my study in September 1972, the wildlifehuman situation was not at its best. Nevertheless, Amboseli
seemed an ideal place to study elephants. Despite the spearings,
the Amboseli elephants were one of the last populations of
relatively undisturbed elephants in East Africa. In almost all
other areas, elephants had been compressed into national parks
and reserves through human expansion. For example, between
1929 and 1959, Uganda’s human population rose from 3.5 to
5.5 million. In 1929 elephants occupied approximately 70
percent of all the land in that country; in 1959 they occupied
only 17 percent, having been forced into the security of a few
national parks and forest reserves as human activities expanded
into their ranges. In Lake Manyara, where Iain DouglasHamilton worked, the elephants had lost 75 percent of their
former range in the 50 years preceding the study. At the
beginning of his study there were 480 elephants living in
approximately 35 square miles, giving Lake Manyara one of the
highest elephant densities ever recorded — nearly 14 elephants
per square mile.

53

54

ELEPHANT MEMORIES .

In almost all the areas where elephants have lost range it has
been due to the spread of agriculture. Elephants and man cannot
coexist where agriculture is practiced because elephants will eat
and trample crops. Elephants and pastoralists can coexist far
more easily because they are not in acute conflict, although they
may be in some competition for the available grazing. Amboseli’s
elephants had been lucky in that they shared their range with
traditional pastoralists who more or less tolerated them.
In 1972 the elephants were still moving in and out of the
central Amboseli basin in the same migratory pattern that they
had been using for several hundred years. Although eventually
the legal protected area was only 150 square miles, the whole
range that the elephants were able to use was about 1,200
square miles. With a population of approximately 600 ele¬
phants, that meant a density of only two elephants to the square
mile. Even considering the area within the basin where the
elephants concentrated, there was only a density of about three
elephants per square mile.
Amboseli’s elephants were also fortunate and unusual in
1972 in that they were not being systematically and intensively
poached for ivory. The early 1970s was the beginning of a
period of severe elephant poaching in most of Kenya. The
price of ivory had risen sharply and in the space of only a few
years elephant populations were decimated throughout most of
the country. In Amboseli there was little or no ivory poaching
in the park itself, but when the elephants left on their wetseason migrations they encountered armed poachers. Some of
these poachers were Maasai, but most were people from other
parts of Kenya and even from other countries. The Maasai
were not tolerant of these intruders and often reported them to
the Wildlife Department. In this way large-scale poaching in
the area was kept in check.
Thus Amboseli’s elephants, being neither heavily poached nor
compressed into a small protected area, provided a unique op¬
portunity to study a population that was relatively natural, that
is, one that was responding primarily to environmental pressures
rather than to predominantly man-made pressures. I hoped that
a study of undisturbed elephants would provide base-line data
that might eventually help in the conservation of all elephants.
When Harvey and I started the part-time study in 1972,1 did

DROUGHT

not realize that within a few years I was going to witness some
of the most severe environmental pressures that many of the
Amboseli elephants would probably undergo in their lifetimes.
Rainfall in the first three years of the study was average to lower
than average, but at the same time Maasai cattle had increased
considerably, so there was a very high biomass of animals
competing for the rapidly diminishing resources. By the end of
1974 conditions were poor. Then followed two years of very
low rainfall with almost no vegetation production. The wildlife
and the Maasai and their cattle suffered greatly. Many wild
animals died and the Maasai lost over half their cattle. It was an
extremely stressful time for people and animals alike.
In September 1975, after a period of uncertainty about the
future of the project, when Harvey changed jobs and gave up
working on the elephants, I finally got a grant from the African
Wildlife Foundation and began the more intensive phase of the
study on my own. I set up a permanent camp in the park and
began to live there the majority of the time. For the first four
months I used my own small Renault car; in January 1976 AWF
turned over to my project an eight-year-old Land-Rover, which
made getting around a great deal easier.
Living in the park right among the elephants changed the
study considerably. I was now able to gather information on
their daily movements, association patterns, and behavior.
Some families I saw several times in a week and I began to know
them well. Torn Ear’s, Tania’s, Slit Ear’s, and Teresia’s were
among those families. I began to do special studies on some of
the groups, trying to find out if there was a clear-cut dominance
rank among the females within a family.
I would find one of the families I was concentrating on and
spend several hours with it, either watching one individual for a
given amount of time or observing the whole group and noting
particular behavior. The TCs and TDs were two of the family
units I had chosen. It did not take many hours with Slit Ear to
discover that she was a very dominant animal who did not
hesitate to push subordinates around. Teresia was also of high
dominance status, in fact she was dominant to Slit Ear, but she
rarely supplanted other individuals. Simply put, some elephants
seemed to be more aggressive than others. All the same I became
very fond of both Slit Ear and Teresia, Slit Ear because she had

55

56

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

such a regal demeanor and Teresia because she was old and
dignified and gentle and seemed very, very wise.
The other animals in the TC and TD families also became
well known as the months went by. Tia kept very much in the
shadow of Slit Ear, and young Tess was often the object of Slit
Ear’s aggression. In Teresia’s family Trista was a quiet, reserved
female, Tina a slender, unobtrusive young female, while Tal¬
lulah and Teresia’s younger daughter, whom I named Theo¬
dora, were at times flamboyant and playful.
Tallulah and Theodora showed this lighter side of their
nature only a few times in 1975 and 1976. For the most part
they had to concentrate on finding enough food as the drought
became more and more acute. In November 1975 the normal
“short rains” were expected, and clouds built up and rolled in
from the east, tantalizing both man and animals, but when the
rains came they were disappointing. In December I gave up
hoping for more, and realized that the animals would have a
hard time getting through January, February, and March
before the “long rains” were due.
Finally, in April 1976, the long rains came, but they proved
to be inadequate, just enough to bring up the barest flush of
green. With no further moisture the growth soon stopped. In
the midst of the drought, several calves were born to members
of the T families. On April 7 Tia was found with a tiny newborn
baby, another male, making her the mother of two sons; in May
Slit Ear had a calf, another daughter; in June the young female,
Tuskless, Torn Ear’s daughter, gave birth to her first calf, a
female; and in July Trista gave birth to a female.
Other females in the population gave birth as well, and in this
year of severe drought, it appeared to be very difficult for the
mothers to keep these calves alive. In many cases the mothers
altered their normal behavior in what seemed to be an attempt
to save their calves. From February to August 1976, I recorded
26 females with new calves. It surprised me to find many of
these females separated from their families, just moving with
their new calf and perhaps an older calf or a young female
from the family. As family units are speculated to have evolved
primarily for their antipredator benefits, particularly for young
calves, it seemed strange that the mothers would leave their
families when their calves were so vulnerable.

DROUGHT

I soon realized that one of the reasons the females were
separating was that they were restricted as to which habitats
they could move in with their new babies. One day I watched
the FA family come to the Enkongo Narok swamp in the
morning. On this day the female Fiona was recorded with a new
calf. The rest of the family plunged into the reeds and waded
out into water over six feet deep. Fiona stayed close to the shore
with her new baby and fed on the sparse vegetation there.
Eventually her family moved to the other side of the swamp
and got out on the opposite shore. Fiona was left on the other
side with just her new calf. I saw the two of them on their own
for several days after that.
Over half of the females who gave birth in 1976 separated
from their families for periods ranging from a day to several
months. Most of the mothers who split were young females
living in families that contained older females who were dom¬
inant to them. Under the particularly harsh conditions that
prevailed, they may have broken away in order to avoid
competition with the bigger females.
Nevertheless, leaving the family appeared to be a last-ditch
effort on the part of the mothers to save their calves. In the end
nearly half of the 1976 calves died. Every day I found mothers
with thin, lethargic little calves moving along the edges of the
swamp. A few days later I would hnd the mother back with her
family but with no calf. I never found any carcasses of dead
calves. I suppose the predators and scavengers devoured them
quickly, or they died in the swamps, where their bodies
disappeared in the water and mud.
Of the first-year calves that died in 1976 about half died
when they were less than two months old, and the rest died
when they were about hve or six months old. The newborn
calves probably died because their mothers did not have
adequate milk supplies. The calves may also have been of low
birth weight to start with if their mothers were undernourished
during pregnancy. The stronger ones were able to survive for
several months, but when they would normally begin feeding
on vegetation to supplement their milk diet, at between three
and four months old, there was almost nothing for them to eat.
I was saddened but not surprised to hnd the first-year calves
dying. What did surprise me was the disappearances of four- to

57

58

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

five-year-old calves. Calves this age were found completely
separated from their families feeding in the swamps by them¬
selves. I speculated that they were weakened because they had
recently been weaned (elephants give birth to calves about
every four to five years and a calf suckles until the next calf is
born). It appeared that they were no longer able to keep up
with their families in the normal daily movement patterns.
I will always remember one bleak day in August 1976 when
I found one of my favorite elephants, Amy, with her three
calves: her male calf born at the end of March, her daughter,
Audrey, who was then four years old, and her son Albert, who
was about nine years old. Amy stood with her head hung low,
resting while her calves ate bits of old yellow grass around the
base of a Suaeda bush. Audrey walked over to Amy and rubbed
her head against her rear leg. Amy turned, rumbled, and
mildly threatened Audrey, who moved away. Then the baby
started to approach Amy, and as he tried to pass Audrey, she
kicked backward at him in a halfhearted way. He walked
around her and began to suckle from Amy. Audrey moved
closer and slowly reached backward with her hind leg and
gently touched Amy repeatedly. She must have been very
hungry. Audrey had been suckling up till the baby was born in
March, but was now refused.
In September I found Amy’s family, the AA family, near my
camp in a highly agitated state. They ran away when I tried to
drive near them. The matriarch, Wart Ear, had a fresh spear
wound through her ear. The young female, Alison, was stream¬
ing with temporal gland secretions and her baby, born the
month before, was gone. Amy was missing. I was very upset. I
had become caught up in the lives of Amboseli’s elephants,
especially the well-known ones such as the AAs and the Ts.
When I saw Wart Ear with a fresh spear wound my stomach
began tp churn and knot and my palms began to sweat. I knew
then that I was no longer a truly objective observer. I sat there
in the Land-Rover telling myself that I must be scientific and
impartial but my stomach told me that I hated seeing Wart Ear
wounded and I very much did not want Amy to be dead.
Unfortunately, there seemed no end in sight to the drought
and the deaths. Conditions were very severe and no rains could
be expected until November. I began finding elephant carcasses

DROUGHT

and getting similar reports from the warden. Each time I
located a group of elephants I carried out a census with
trepidation, hoping I would not find anyone missing. Cattle
were dying by the hundreds, and as a result Maasai tempers
were short and they were spearing elephants and rhinos, not
for their tusks or horns but apparently simply in frustration. I
was angry with the Maasai for spearing elephants but I also
sympathized with them. It was pitiful to see the herds of gaunt,
bony cattle moving each day through the park in search of
grass. I dreaded driving out each morning because I knew I
would see the dead and dying cows everywhere. When a Maasai
cow became too weak to follow the herd it lay down and refused
to get up again. It usually took about two days to die. It would
lie there looking peaceful, chewing the cud (made up of what I
do not know). The gullies on the sides of the roads seemed to
be the most common place for cattle to die. Each evening there
were new ones lying alongside the roads as I drove back to
camp. I knew there was nothing I could do for them and I just
had to drive by. In the morning some would be dead and some
would still be lying there waiting to die.
I did not see the AA group again for 20 days after the day I
found Wart Ear wounded, and when I did find them Amy was
there but she had a spear wound in her side, and her baby was
gone. Amy’s breasts were shriveled and shrunken and she
looked thin and ill. She stood touching the wound with her
trunk and from time to time spraying dust on it.
On the next few sightings both Wart Ear and Amy seemed to
be recovering, but at the end of October I found the AAs, and
after repeated counts trying to make eleven and getting only
ten, I saw that Audrey was missing. I thought she must have
been speared by the Maasai. Four days later I saw the family
again and there was Audrey! She was with her family for
several more days and then on November 20 she was gone
again. Later that week I found a four- to hve-year-old calf
completely on its own feeding in the Enkongo Narok swamp.
When I went closer I saw that it was Audrey.
I had seen lone calves of her age before staying near the
swamps. I did not recognize any of them individually and thus
did not know what eventually happened to them but I assumed
that they were sick, lost, or abandoned and that they died. I

59

60

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

‘

thought it was the beginning of the end for Audrey. Presumably
she was weakened by the loss of milk in her diet, combined with
the bad conditions. Instead of following her family out to the
woodlands at night, she refused or was unable to leave the
swamp edge, and stayed there feeding and conserving her
strength. I saw her with her family one more time, and then in
the swamp again on her own. Then I saw the family several
more times without her. I thought that she had died by then.
Finally in December some good rains fell and the drought
ended. On January 5, 1977, I found the AAs and was very
surprised and happy to see Audrey following right behind Amy
like a normal mother-oriented calf. She has stayed with her
family ever since. To me, it was an amazing feat of survival. Lions
could easily kill a calf her size, and it would seem that natural
selection would wipe out calves that tried to use this “loner”
strategy. Subsequent evidence has shown that most calves who
leave their families die, but somehow Audrey beat the odds.
The drought took a mighty toll on the elephant population.
In 1976 a minimum of 48 elephants in the family groups died,
and at least 30 independent males died as well. Of the cows and
calves, 17 were adult females who were either speared or shot,
14 were first-year calves, and the rest were older calves. Thus I
knew of 78 elephants that had died, but as I did not know the
whole population in 1976, I estimated that several more
animals, who had not yet been photographed and registered,
had also died.
The T families got through the drought with no deaths at all,
which was unusual. Even the four young babies survived. The
Ts lived in the central part of the park, where heavy tourist
traffic may have inhibited Maasai spearings; and they spent
their daytime hours in the Ol Tukai Orok woodlands and the
Longinye swamp, which were probably the best habitats avail¬
able. In addition the families contained one old and very
experienced female (Teresia) and two large mature females
(Slit Ear and Torn Ear), one of whom (Slit Ear) did not hesitate
to use aggression in order to get enough to eat for herself and
her calves. More than anything I would guess that it was
Teresia’s knowledge which carried them through the drought.
By the end of 1976 I knew the Ts very well and had named
most of the remaining youngsters. In general I now named all

DROUGHT

individuals who were weaned. Unweaned calves were referred
to by their mother and their year of birth — for example, Torn
Ear’s C (for “calf’) ’74, or Slit Ear’s C’76. I named Torn Ear’s
older calves Tilly and Teddy, Tania’s eight-year-old son Taabu,
which means “trouble” in Swahili, Slit Ear’s two older daughters
Tamar and Tara, Teresia’s son Tolstoy, and Trista’s son Tim.
Tania’s older son, who became fully independent sometime in
1976, was given the male code M84 and taken off the family list.
The four T families contained the following 26 animals (the
numbers in parenthesis next to a name are the estimated or
known year of birth for that elephant and the symbols indicate
sex):
ta

Torn Ear (33)
C’74
Tilly (70)
Teddy (66)
Tuskless (62)
C’76
Tonie (67)

9
8
9
8
9
9
9

tb

Tania (44)
C’73
Taabu (69)

9
8
8

tc

Slit Ear (36)
C’76
Tamar (71)
Tara (67)
Tess (63)

9
9
9
9
9

Tia (50)
C’76
Right Fang (70)

9
8
8

Teresia (22)
Tolstoy (71)
Theodora (67)
Tina (62)

9
8
9
9

Trista (38)
C’76
Tim (69)
Tallulah (63)

9
9
8
9

td

61

Chapter 111
Migration

1977

The four T families, with their matriarchs Torn Ear, Tania,
Slit Ear, and Teresia, stood bunched together forming a single
tight-knit group. With them were several independent, but
young, males. In all they made up a group of 30 animals.
Earlier in the evening they had moved out of Longinye swamp
up into the long, tough Sporobolus consimilis grass just to the
north of the swamp. Now they waited in the security of the tall
“elephant grass” for darkness. It had rained for several days in
a row and there were strong smells of damp earth and new
grass on the wind. The elephants did not rest; they milled
about, clearly stimulated and on edge. They were as thin as ever
from the long drought but their whole demeanor had changed.
Instead of being slow and plodding, their gestures were now
energetic and lively. There were frequent rumbles from various
individuals and a reaching of trunks toward one another. The
younger animals in particular seemed eager to get going, but
the big females remained stationary.
Finally, when the sky was lit by only the new moon and a few

65

66

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

emerging stars, Torn Ear made the soft “let’s go” rumble while
slapping and sliding her ears against her neck and shoulders,
and set off toward the ridges above the basin to the north. They
moved away from the protection of the long grass out onto
short grass plains, which had been reduced to nearly bare
ground by the long drought. Now the plains were muddy and
here and there completely flooded by the recent rain. The
elephants were nervous and did not vocalize as they traveled,
but at times their presence was given away by the slurping
sounds of their feet in mud or their splashing through water.
They soon reached the red-soil ridge, which was well drained
and less muddy. Although small bushes here had recently
flushed green, there was no new grass yet and the elephants did
not stop to feed. They climbed onto the ridge, crossing the park
boundary halfway up, and headed slightly to the northwest
toward the long arc of the Ilaingurunyeni Hills. They walked
fast, rapidly covering ground, and they eventually came to an
area at the base of the hills that had received more and earlier
rain than the places they had come through. Here, fresh
bright-green grass was growing.
The elephants began to feed immediately, wrapping their
trunks around the stalks, breaking off as big a bunch as
possible, and stuffing it into their mouths. It was the first sweet,
nutritious grass that they had had for many months and they
ate as if they were never going to see any again. The young
calves born during the drought had never tasted new grass.
They had begun feeding on vegetation, trying to supplement
their mothers’ milk, when they were four months old, but the
only grass available to them in those months was Cynodon
dactylon, which was both relatively unpalatable and low in
nutritional quality during the dry season. Now they found
themselves in a sea of delicious, highly nutritious perennials —
Sporobolus nervosus and Sporobolus ioclados — grasses that shot up
as soon as it rained and were eaten down almost immediately by
the grazers.
The four young calves born in 1976 were not sure what to do.
They had never been out of the basin in their short lives and
they were nervous and excited. They were also tired from their
20-mile walk. Still, the smell of the grass as it was crushed in the
huge grinding molars of their older relatives was irresistible,

MIGRATION

and although not completely adept with their trunks, they too
began to feed.
The elephants fed for the rest of the night, not stopping to
sleep as they usually did. As they fed they continued to move to
the northwest, eventually arriving at a wooded area on the
lower slopes of the hills. By daybreak they were well in among
the trees. Here they stopped to rest, but they did not give in to
sleep in the same way that they did in the park. The young
calves lay down as usual, but the adults remained standing and
frequently opened their eyes and lifted and spread their ears,
listening for any sounds of danger.
They spent the rest of the day alternating between resting
and feeding, not moving very far in their foraging. That night
they fed again out in the bushed grassland. Around midnight
they were joined by a large aggregation of 80 elephants, made
up of eight family units and several bulls, including some older
males. The aggregation included the biggest bond group in the
population, which consisted of the CAs, LAs, MAs, VAs, and
WAs, plus another bond group, the CBs and OAs, and the
largest single family, the PAs. The Ts readily mingled with
these families and immediately became more relaxed in the
security of numbers.
While their fear of danger was alleviated, their excitement
increased in the new social situation. The big adult females in
the T families were more or less blase about meeting up with
the other families, but the younger animals were curious about,
and attracted to, the new arrivals. During the two years of low
rainfall each family tended to keep to itself, joining its bondgroup families only from time to time and other families rarely.
As a result, in those years an individual tended to find itself in
a small group rarely numbering more than 20. Finding them¬
selves in a group of over 100 was socially very stimulating. The
young T males — Teddy, Taabu, Right Fang, Tolstoy, and
Tim — were the first members of their families to make contact
with the other elephants.
Teddy and Taabu, being the oldest, set off first and ap¬
proached the VA family. Here they sought out the young males
of their own age. They knew this family as they knew all the
families in the population, but some they encountered more
often than others. The VAs shared the Longinye swamp with

67

68

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

•

the Ts in the dry season, but during these harsh years they
rarely moved together and more often they merely passed at a
distance. Teddy and Taabu had not sparred with their agemates in this family for many months, not only because they
had not met often but also because they did not have the energy
to play. Now, with stomachs full of nutrient-rich grasses, they
could test their strength against the other males of their size
and age. They soon found Vladimir and Vostok. Taabu, who
was younger than Teddy but always more outgoing, ap¬
proached the two VA males, and when he reached them he put
his trunk first to Vostok’s mouth and then to Vladimir’s. They
in turn put their trunks to his mouth. Teddy came up and
exchanged greetings as well. Their four heads were close
together and they continued to reach their trunks toward each
other, touching a tusk here or a temporal gland there or
entwining one trunk with another.
Taabu pushed gently on Vostok and at the same time placed
his trunk on Vostok’s head. Vostok turned to face him head
on, lifted his head, and moved forward, locking tusk against
tusk, and resting nose against nose. They stood head to head,
pushing gently against each other, moving slowly and languidly,
with trunks roaming about each other’s faces and in and out
of each other’s mouths. Suddenly Taabu lunged, hitting his
nose hard against Vostok’s nose. Vostok lunged back and their
tusks struck with a resounding clunk. They began their game
in earnest. Vostok was the taller but Taabu was more com¬
pact and possibly heavier. It was a fairly even match. They
pushed and shoved, backed off and rushed together. Vostok
pushed and twisted and managed to poke the tip of his tusk
into the skin just below Taabu’s eye. Taabu backed and twisted
away and turned and ran with Vostok following at a run. Taabu
ran around a small bush and spun around to face Vostok over
the bush. This gave them both a buffer and they appeared to
spar even more fiercely, using the bush to keep them from
clashing as closely as before.
Soon they backed off, tired from the unaccustomed activity;
and with neither wanting to resume right away, they distracted
each other by attacking the bush itself and picking up sticks and
throwing them at each other or back over their shoulders. After
a few minutes they regained their strength and Taabu knelt

MIGRATION

down in front of Vostok and dug his tusks into the ground in
a direct challenge. He stood up and they rushed together again,
tusks clunking. They continued to spar for another few min¬
utes, but then Teddy, who had been sparring with Vladimir, a
much younger elephant, grew bored and came over to join
Taabu and Vostok. He moved in, breaking them up and
challenging Vostok, and they were soon engaged in a match.
Taabu turned and, looking around to see what other pros¬
pects there were, saw Right Fang sparring with Vasily. Taabu
rushed over and poked Vasily in the backside with his tusks.
Vasily bellowed in surprise and some pain and his mother,
Virginia, one of the biggest females in the whole population,
started over with her ears spread. Taabu stood his ground for
a few moments, but when Virginia used the unmistakable
threat posture of folding each ear to form a horizontal ridge
across the middle, he turned and ran back to his family. The
other T males, seeing him running, quickly followed.
The T females and younger calves had remained slightly
separate while the young males were sparring. By now the two
groups had truly merged. Teresia as usual remained calm and
dignified and generally ignored the others. Torn Ear also
minded her own business. But Slit Ear and Tania used the
opportunity to reestablish important relationships and to de¬
velop new ones. Slit Ear raised her head as Mariana, the
matriarch of the MA family, came slowly feeding toward her.
Slit Ear strode toward Mariana with her head out slightly and
her ears partly folded. Mariana stopped feeding, stood tall
watching Slit Ear approach, but then backed and turned
rapidly away. Tania, coming close behind Slit Ear, lunged at
and chased Marcia, a younger female from the same family.
When Tania returned she rumbled and flapped her ears and
the other Ts came up to her and greeted her with answering
rumbles and ear flaps. The Ts had reinforced their dominance
rank vis-a-vis the MAs.
The rumbles among the members of the T families attracted
some of the older males who had been with the big aggregation.
Three males now approached: Steve, Lexi, and Ml27 (some¬
times known as Flop Ear). They were not amongst the biggest
males in the population but they were in their mid- to late
twenties, the age at which males begin to compete seriously for

69

70

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

females. Steve and Lexi were both handsome males, tall and
slim with long, asymmetrical tusks. Ml27 had the misfortune of
having crushed his ear in a fight, which gave him a flop ear, and
his tusks were undistinguished. However, he was a few years
older than Steve and Lexi and so had the advantage. He arrived
at the Ts first and moved in among the females with his trunk
draped over his left tusk in the “casual walk” so as not to alarm
them. The big females ignored him when he tested them, but
the young females, Tess, Tina, Tallulah, Tonie, Tilly, Tara,
and Theodora, already excited by the mix of so many elephants,
rumbled and milled about, turning in circles and urinating.
Ml27, along with Steve and Lexi, tested them by smelling their
genitals and tasting their urine. None of the females was in
estrus, but the social stimulation began its subtle work on their
hormones.
The merged group of approximately 110 elephants calmed
down after about an hour and all began to feed again in
earnest. As had the Ts the night before, they fed all night. Just
before dawn they arrived at a small stream that ran down from
the hills and flowed only in the wet season. Here they drank the
rushing brown water, which had a completely different taste
from the clear water in the basin springs. At dawn a dark solid
mass of clouds approached from the east and soon it was
raining with a steadiness and lack of wind and bluster that
indicated a long healthy drenching of the soils. The elephants
moved off into an area of mixed Acacia mellifera and Acacia
nubica trees, where they bunched into smaller groups and
rested with their backs to the rain.
At midmorning, with the rain still falling steadily, they
returned to the bushed grassland and began to feed again. By
the late morning the storm had passed, and with the sun out the
wet elephants were black against the clear dark-blue sky and the
green glistening grass. They had a few more hours in this idyllic
setting before the sounds of Maasai cattle bells and the whistles
of the herders carried across the wind from the east. The
Maasai were a long way off and the elephants did not panic;
they just began to move and feed slowly to the southwest.
The elephants headed away from the hills and eventually
arrived at the major road coming into the park from the west.
As they were about to cross the road, two minibuses went

MIGRATION

hurtling past. The elephants at the front of the group were
slightly alarmed by the speed, but they were accustomed to
vehicles and did not consider them a danger. They traveled
now in a long column without feeding. Lillian, the old matriarch
of the LA family, one of the most consistent leaders in the
population, was at the front, taking the big aggregation to a
place where she knew there would be good new grasses.
The herd entered an area of low bush interspersed with grass
to the west of the Amboseli lake bed. Here they spread out and
began to feed. In the distance they heard the low rumbles of
other elephants and knew there were other groups in the area
and that there was no immediate danger. They fed for the
remainder of the afternoon and into the night, stopping to rest
for short periods every few hours. After the long drought they
had a lot of catching up to do, and although the fresh grass was
giving them slight diarrhea, they would soon adjust to it.
The aggregation, which included the Ts, fed in this area for
another two days. There were no rivers here but they drank
from pools of water that had temporarily formed from the rain.
By the third day they were farther to the southwest, nearly to
the Tanzanian border. It had not rained in those two days and
the ground was no longer muddy. The elephants were spread
out, feeding among the low bushes. Far in the distance they
heard the sound of a car engine, a Land-Rover, not a tourist
minibus. It came slowly from the south, stopping from time to
time, then starting up and moving again, gradually coming
closer. The elephants became more alert and wary when the
Land-Rover was about a mile and a half away, but then it
stopped and they did not hear it start again. It was now to the
west of them and downwind. Teresia and a few of the other
wise old females raised their trunks and smelled in the direction
that the sound of the engine had come from, but they could not
catch any troublesome scent on the wind.
Nearly an hour passed and the elephants fed peacefully. It
was midday and they began to get sleepy. A few small resting
subgroups had already formed in the shade of some of the
larger trees. The Ts were still feeding on the western edge of
the aggregation. Torn Ear and her three-year-old son were at
the front of the movement. Torn Ear was just reaching for a
small succulent herb that was nestled in amongst the grass when

71

72

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

a quick movement to her left caught her eye. She whirled
toward the movement and there were two men only 30 yards
away. Without hesitation she put her head down and charged
toward them. She did not even hear the explosion before the
bullet ripped through the light airy bone of her forehead and
penetrated deep into her brain. She was dead by the time she
fell forward onto her head and tusks and skidded along the
ground for several feet from the momentum of her charge.
Her son was hit next, first in the shoulder, which made him
scream with pain and rage and then through his side into his
heart.
The instant Torn Ear had seen the men, even before the shot
rang out, the rest of the heard knew there was extreme danger
because Torn Ear had uttered an alarm call just as she charged.
All the others heard it and knew who made it and acted
accordingly. Most of the elephants immediately began to run
away from the source of the danger, but Torn Ear’s bond
group instantly came to her aid. They ran toward her and even
when they heard the shots and saw her fall they kept coming.
The men turned and began to run but let off one volley of
shots, missing most of the elephants but catching Tina in the
chest with a shot that went into her right lung. These shots
turned the Ts and they too began to run away from the danger.
In the meantime, the rest of the herd ran to the north, which is
what the poachers had hoped for, and two more men were
waiting there. The WA family was in the front, led by their
matriarch, Wendy, closely followed by the next oldest female,
Willa. Wendy ran straight into the guns, but these men were
not as experienced as the others, and it took seven shots in her
head and neck and shoulders before Wendy fell and died. Willa
behind her veered off and caught a bullet through her tail,
severing it in half except for one bit of skin that kept the lower
portion from falling off.
The whole aggregation was now tightly bunched and running
at full speed. The mothers were literally pushing their babies
forward to keep their pace up. They ran to the north and then
to the east, skirting around the wet slippery lake bed. The Ts,
having been farthest west and delayed by trying to aid Torn
Ear, were at the rear and Tina was the very last. Her family
knew she was hurt; they could smell the foamy pink blood

MIGRATION

dripping from her mouth. She managed to keep up until she
got to the ridge, but the incline slowed her down and she
groaned with the pain. Her mother, Teresia, kept dropping
back to run beside her, reaching over and touching her with
her trunk, but finally Tina had to slow to a walk. The rest of her
immediate family, the TDs, and Slit Ear’s family, the TCs,
slowed down as well, letting the remainder of the aggregation
run on, including the rest of Torn Ear’s and Tania’s families.
The TAs and TBs were totally confused and panicked by the
loss of Torn Ear and they just ran blindly within the large
aggregation.
Teresia took them to the far side of Meshanani, a small hill
up on the ridge above the lake. There was some protection
here, and Tina could go no farther. The blood pouring from
her mouth was bright red and her sides were heaving for
breath. The other elephants crowded around, reaching for her.
Her knees started to buckle and she began to go down, but
Teresia got on one side of her and Trista on the other and they
both leaned in and held her up. Soon, however, she had no
strength and she slipped beneath them and fell onto her side.
More blood gushed from her mouth and with a shudder she
died.
Teresia and Trista became frantic and knelt down and tried
to lift her up. They worked their tusks under her back and
under her head. At one point they succeeded in lifting her
into a sitting position but her body flopped back down. Her
family tried everything to rouse her, kicking and tusking her,
and Tallulah even went off and collected a trunkful of grass
and tried to stuff it into her mouth. Finally Teresia got around
behind her again, knelt down, and worked her tusks in under
her shoulder and then, straining with all her strength, she
began to lift her. When she got to a standing position with the
full weight of Tina’s head and front quarters on her tusks,
there was a sharp cracking sound and Teresia dropped the
carcass as her right tusk fell to the ground. She had broken it
a few inches from the lip well into the nerve cavity, and a
jagged bit of ivory and the bloody pulp was all that remained.
They gave up then but did not leave. They stood around
Tina’s carcass, touching it gently with their trunks and feet.
Because it was rocky and the ground was wet, there was no

73

74

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

loose dirt; but they tried to dig into it with their feet and trunks
and when they managed to get a little earth up they sprinkled
it over the body. Trista, Tia, and some of the others went off
and broke branches from the surrounding low bushes and
brought them back and placed them on the carcass. They
remained very alert to the sounds around them and kept
smelling to the west, but they would not leave Tina. By nightfall
they had nearly buried her with branches and earth. Then they
stood vigil over her for most of the night and only as dawn was
approaching did they reluctantly begin to walk away, heading
back toward the safety of the park. Teresia was the last to leave.
The others had crossed to the ridge and stopped and rumbled
gently. Teresia stood facing them with her back to her daugh¬
ter. She reached behind her and gently felt the carcass with her
hind foot repeatedly. The others rumbled again and very
slowly, touching the tip of her trunk to her broken tusk, Teresia
moved off to join them.
The Amboseli elephants have been traveling in and out of the
basin on seasonal migrations for at least as long as the Maasai
have lived in the area. Maasai oral history describes their own
migratory patterns as well as that of the wildlife with which they
share their range. For as far back as they can remember, the
Maasai, their livestock (cattle, sheep, and goats), and the
migratory herbivores (elephants, buffaloes, zebras, wildebeests,
and Grant’s and Thomson’s gazelles) have concentrated around
the permanent swamps in the dry season, relying on the
swamps for both food and water. Then, as soon as the rains
come, they have migrated out of the basin to the ridges to the
north and east, the bushland to the west, and the slopes of
Kilimanjaro to the south.
The way that the Maasai and their livestock, the elephants
and the other species use the various habitats of the Amboseli
ecosystem came under study by a young Ph.D. student in 1967.
David Western, known to his friends as Jonah, was fascinated
by the dynamic nature of Amboseli and how people and
animals functioned in this environment. Jonah’s study showed
that man and wildlife follow a remarkably similar pattern of
movements and habitat use in response to rainfall and subse¬
quent vegetation production. For all but a few species that do

MIGRATION

not need to drink water, the choice of habitats is restricted by
the availability of water. In the dry season the only standing
water is found in the swamps in the basin. In the wet season
rivers and streams flow and small seasonal ponds fill with water
in the extensive bushed grasslands outside the basin. The
domestic and wild animals feed on the higher-quality forage on
the more productive soils surrounding the basin as long as
water is available. When the seasonal water sources dry up they
have to return to the basin and settle for the low-quality but
abundant vegetation in the swamps and woodlands.
When I began the elephant study in 1972, Jonah explained the
general picture of elephant ecology in Amboseli to me. From his
counts he estimated that there were between 600 and 700 ele¬
phants using the Amboseli ecosystem. His counts of just the basin
indicated that 200 to 300 elephants came to the area regularly in
the dry season. He noted that when it began to rain the elephants
formed aggregations of sometimes over 100 animals and moved
about in these large groups for several days before leaving the
basin. Jonah told me that there were three distinct trails leading
to the wet-season areas. One was so wide and deep that when the
cartographers were making a map of the area from 1950 aerial
photographs, they mistook the elephant trail for a minor road
and marked it as such on the map.
All through the early years of the study the elephants moved
in and out of the basin on a seasonal basis. In 1974 Harvey and
I put radio collars on the matriarchs of three family units:
Bertha, Echo, and Sona. Although Echo turned out to be
exceptionally conservative in her movements, a real homebody,
the radio-tracking data confirmed Jonah’s general description
of elephant ranging patterns. The data also substantiated some
of my own observations on the distribution of individual
families in the basin in the dry season.
From the beginning of the study, each time an elephant
group was sighted particular data were always recorded. These
basic data, which were eventually transferred to a computer
coding sheet, were:
Date
Time
Location (lx l km. grid square)

75

76

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

Habitat type
Activity (of the elephants when first sighted)
Group size
Family units present (represented by individuals present)
Bulls present
I also wrote down the presence of newborn calves, sick or
wounded animals, members missing from the family, the
occurrence of estrous behavior, and any unusual behavioral or
ecological information. When conditions were good, I would
attempt to do a complete census of the family or families
present.
As these data began to accumulate, it became clear relatively
early on that each family in the population tended to stay in a
particular part of the park in the dry season and would very
rarely or never be seen in other parts. For example, up until the
end of 1976, Teresia’s family, the TDs, had been sighted 99
times, and in 98 percent of these sightings they were in the
central area of the park, in either Longinye swamp or the Ol
Tukai Orok woodlands. On only one occasion were they seen
west of the Enkongo Narok swamp, and on only one occasion
east of Longinye. The data were similar for the three other T
families. In addition the Ts appeared to share this dry-season
range with about five other families. On the other hand, the FA
family, led by Filippa, spent most of their time west of the
Longinye swamp. They were sighted 78 times in the same
period— 1972—76 — and in 91 percent of their sightings they
were in and around the Enkongo Narok swamp, at the base of
the Ilmberisheri hills, or in the Ol Tukai Orok woodlands.
They were seen in Longinye and east of Longinye on only
seven occasions. They also shared their dry-season area with
other families. I decided to designate those families that shared
the same dry-season home range as a “clan.” There appeared to
be four or five clans concentrated around the two major
swamps in the park.
However, the elephants that used these swamps made up
only part of the population and I wondered what the other
elephants were doing. Jonah’s aerial counts showed that the
600 or so Amboseli elephants were not all found in the basin at
the same time. It was possible that the various families alter-

MIGRATION

nated using the basin and the outlying areas, switching back
and forth and more or less taking turns, with the result that
some were in the basin while others were in the surrounding
bushland. However, repeated sightings of the same families in
the same areas on at least a weekly basis did not suggest this. As
I gradually got to know more and more of the elephants and
met and photographed new families, I began to see a division in
the population. The families that I met near the central swamps
were very tolerant of vehicles and would allow me to photo¬
graph them from a few yards away. Then from time to time I
would meet a group in the park that ran off when my vehicle
was still 200 yards away. With patience and slow, careful
driving, I eventually got close enough to photograph these shy
elephants. Often in those years I would photograph one of
these groups and then not see them again for two or three
months.
I got a much better idea of what these infrequent visitors
were doing when we put a radio collar on Sona, the matriarch
of a small family which, when seen, was found in the western
part of the park. From a small plane, Harvey and I were able to
plot Sona’s movements over several months. We found that she
spent most of her time to the south of the park in the lava and
bushland at the base of Kilimanjaro or in the bushed grasslands
to the west. In the wet season she sometimes went north. Her
family was usually found in close association with two other
families, Jezebel’s and Yolanda’s, and I designated these three
families a bond group. They came into the park and to the
swamps in the dry season, but they appeared to visit for only a
few days before traveling back out to the bushland. They
probably used some small swamps at the base of Kitirua and the
Ilmberisheri hills in the western part of the park for drinking,
or they may have come into Enkongo Narok swamp at night to
drink. In either case, they spent most of the daytime hours
outside the park, in contrast to the elephants that concentrated
around the main swamps.
Eventually I discovered 20 family units that appeared to be
peripheral to the main swamps. I began to call them the
“peripheral subpopulation” and the elephants I saw on a much
more regular basis the “central subpopulation.” Almost all the
peripheral elephants were from the western part of the ecosys-

77

78

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

tem, but in 1976 and 1977 I recorded five families from the
eastern side. These eastern elephants were very wary of vehicles
when I first began to see them and ran away in panic whenever
I tried to approach. Over the months, however, they began to
calm down, and I was able to get some photographs of them. It
turned out that they were actually doing something different
from the western elephants. As they began to be seen on a
regular basis and they became habituated to vehicles, I realized
that they were attempting to immigrate into the central popu¬
lation. My theory is that they made up a clan that concentrated
on the two swamps to the east, Namalog and Kimana, which
happened to be out of the park. Some of the more modern
Maasai began to farm around these swamps, using the water for
irrigation of crops. Once they began to grow crops, the Maasai
were no longer tolerant of elephants and they began to harass
them. Amboseli Park would have been a part of these elephants’
range but it was probably an area they did not use frequently in
the dry season. With the Maasai displacing them, the elephants
were forced to change their dry-season home range. I do not
know if the immigrants met with any antagonism from the
elephants already resident in Amboseli; but if they did, they
must have persisted, because they became residents and today
they spend as much time in the park as any of the original
groups and are relaxed and tolerant around my vehicle.
At one point during the gradual immigration of the eastern
elephants a confusion arose. One of the better-known groups in
the central population was the BBs, the Big Tuskless family. We
first met and photographed the BBs in 1973 and quickly got to
know them well. This family numbered 12 and included two
adult tuskless females (Big Tuskless and Bette) and a left
one-tusk female (Belinda). These characteristics made them
very easy to recognize. Back in 1974, on two of the trips that
Harvey made on his own, he recorded the BBs, the “double
tusklesses,” as we called them then, and took some photographs
which were not terribly clear because they were from a distance
and the group was nervous. When he came back from these
trips he mentioned that he had seen the double tusklesses and
I did not think anymore of it. Toward the end of 1975, when I
was living in the park, I was in my camp late one afternoon
when the double tusklesses entered the glade at the north end

MIGRATION

of the camp. They came in, took one look at the tents, and fled
in terror. I managed to count that there were 12 animals in the
group, including two tusklesses and a one-tusker. I thought
their behavior was a bit odd, but dutifully recorded the sighting
of the BBs in Q-17 (the grid square for the camp).
In January 1976, I was out in the eastern side of the park
when I came upon the double tusklesses. They ran away from
my vehicle when I was over 100 yards away. I started to get
suspicious. This was not like Big Tuskless — she was a huge,
placid old female who barely gave my car a glance when I drove
up to her family. I managed to approach the group from
another angle and then turn my engine off and watch them
with my binoculars. On this day there were 11 animals, includ¬
ing a big tuskless female, a smaller tuskless female, and, wait a
minute, a right one-tusk female. I hastily consulted my photo
files and, yes, BB’s Belinda was definitely a left one-tusker. Who
was this, then? I looked more closely at the big tuskless. She had
a hole in her left ear, as did Big Tuskless, but it was in a slightly
different place. And besides, Big Tuskless had the biggest ears
of any elephant I had ever known, so huge that she looked like
a caricature of an elephant. This elephant had normal-sized
ears. I looked at Big Tuskless’s photo. The elephant in front of
me was certainly not she. I took some photographs from a
distance and returned to camp shaking my head.
In the next month I saw these mirror-image double tusk¬
lesses several more times. They were still frightened of my
vehicle but I managed to get some more photos of them. They
were definitely an entirely different family, which I eventually
called the GBs. I named the two tusklesses Gloria and Gladys
and the right one-tusker Grace. A couple of years later, when I
was going over the old photographs, I discovered that Harvey
had taken pictures of Gloria and Gladys on two occasions in
1974 without realizing that they were not our original double
tusklesses.
Toward the end of 1976 I felt that I had a fairly good idea of
the numbers and distribution of the Amboseli elephants. There
appeared to be 48 family units, of which 28 concentrated
around the central swamps, five were immigrating in from the
east, and 15 used the western and southwestern bushlands. All
these families were made up of approximately 350 cows and

79

80

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

calves. I estimated that there were about 150 adult bulls and
thus the population totaled about 500, which, as a result of the
drought, spearings, and poaching, was at least 100 fewer
elephants than when I started the study. The period of losses
was not quite over yet.
In December 1976, when the long drought finally ended and
the elephants eagerly left the basin to find fresh pastures, the
poachers were waiting for them. Although Amboseli was not an
easy place for poachers to operate because of the Maasai, there
were some unscrupulous individuals who cooperated with the
ivory hunters. That December at least ten elephants were
killed.
When the water holes began to dry up in early January and
the elephants started coming back into the park, once again I
censused the families with a sense of dread. It took several
sightings of the T families before I would accept that there had
been mortalities.
The first members of the T bond group that I saw were the
TCs, on January 3, 1977. Slit Ear and all the members of that
family were there, but Teresia and her family were not with
them, which was unusual. I saw the TC family again in a large
aggregation in Longinye swamp on January 8. This time Tania
and her two calves were there, but again neither Teresia nor
Torn Ear. Then, on the sixteenth of January, I saw a little
group of five young animals looking nervous and indecisive.
The group consisted of Tuskless, Tonie, Teddy, Tilly, and
Tuskless’s six-month-old calf. Although only 14 years old,
Tuskless was clearly trying to act as a matriarch and the others
were keyed in to her movements and activities. They were in
front of the Amboseli Lodge at a place where vegetables and
fruit were set out to attract the elephants, much to my distress
and disapproval. Up until this time only a few elephants visited
this feeding station. The TA and TB families had taken readily
to the handouts as they passed the lodge on their normal route
from the woodlands to Longinye. Another female and her
offspring were consistent visitors and seemed to spend almost
all their time at the various refuse pits around the lodges and
park headquarters. Harvey had named the mother Greta
Garbage. She disappeared in 1974, leaving the garbage field
open to whomever wanted to exploit it.

MIGRATION

Tuskless and her little band were now feeding on the cabbage
leaves and pineapple husks. It was a place where they probably
felt safe and were rewarded with highly tasty food. It was fitting
that I should find them there when I first suspected that Torn
Ear was dead, because with the loss of Torn Ear, their visits to
the lodge were to become a very familiar pattern in the future
and eventually a serious problem.
I saw the little group of five eight more times in January and
knew by the end of the month that Torn Ear and her calf were
dead. This was a sad realization for me because Torn Ear was
one of my best-known matriarchs, and I had grown fond of her
quiet dignity. It was also distressing to watch the remnants of
her family trying to make it on their own.
On February 7, I finally found Teresia and her family back
with Slit Ear in the middle of Longinye. I noticed immediately
that Tina was missing and that Teresia had broken her right
tusk.
In the few months after the deaths, there seemed to be a
disturbance in the normal social relationships among the four
T families. Whereas in the past they were frequently together,
in January, February, and March each family was often found
on its own. Tuskless in particular seemed to stay away from the
other families and spent most of her time near the lodge. It is
possible that without Torn Ear she felt threatened by the older
females in the other families. She was, after all, very young,
relatively small, and tuskless.
I recorded several other animals missing in January, among
them Wendy. I first saw the remnants of that group in the latter
part of December. I noted that Willa was in a group with a few
other odd animals from the CB and OA families. My held qotes
read:
1055 A small calf appears near Willa which would be the size
of Wendy’s C’74 — the top of the right ear folds over part
way. Tusks just showing — must be Wendy’s.
Willa’s tail looks like it’s been eaten. The tail is very nearly
cut in two about 14 way up from where the hairs begin. She’s
swishing it around a lot. She keeps rubbing it against bushes.
I wonder if it got caught in a snare. It looks like it will fall

81

82

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

off— less than lA holding it on. I suppose too a spear could
have gone through it or a bullet. But what’s happened to
Wendy? Willa has no milk. An older calf here is probably
Wendy’s C’71. Wendy and Winnie are both missing.
On January 6 I found Willa again and the lower half of her
tail had fallen off. The group was in tall grass and I could not
see if Wendy’s younger calf was there. I had a fairly good idea
of her age. When I first recorded the family in March 1975 I
estimated the calf to be about six months old, so she was
probably born in September or October 1974. In November
1976 her tusks had grown enough to show beyond the lip,
which indicated that she was two years old or just over. I was
curious and concerned to see if this calf would live. Willa, the
only other adult female in the family, was not lactating, so this
calf had been abruptly weaned at a very early age.
On January 18 I saw the WAs again and Wendy’s little calf
was with Willa. On February 11 she was there again and on this
occasion I noted that Willa’s tail had healed. On February 15 I
found Willa and the calf in a small group of seven with one of
their bond-group families, the MAs led by Mariana. I was able
to do a good census of the group; I discovered that Winnie was
there and was relieved to know that she had not been killed. It
was interesting to watch Willa with the young calf. As far as I
knew Willa had not yet had a calf, or rather I suspected that she
had given birth to a calf in the past but it had not survived. She
was now being an excellent mother to Wendy II, as I began to
call the calf (I have never used the same name twice before or
since, but somehow this calf took on her mother’s name_her
code initials are WND). Little Wendy stayed close to Willa,
often right under her chin or close in behind her front leg with
her head up against Willa’s shriveled breast. Willa gently
reached around and touched her from time to time.
During the next months I kept a close watch for Wendy II
and she was consistently with Willa and apparently doing all
right. Interestingly, it was Wendy’s older male calf who did not
make it. Although he was five to six years old and fully weaned,
he simply disappeared and was never recorded again. Perhaps
he had been wounded when Wendy was killed and I did not see
his injury when I first saw him with Willa. It is more likely that

MIGRATION

he became separated from the remainder of the family and was
poached or speared or even killed by lions. In the next years I
was to learn that male calves were more vulnerable than
females and were more likely to die both as infants with
mothers and as orphans.
When the long rains came in April the elephants again left
the basin and migrated out to the ridges to the north and east,
the bushland to the west, and the lower slopes of Kilimanjaro
to the south. This period was one of definite transition for the
elephants, from a time of drought, danger, and death to a time
of plenty and relative peace. On the migrations out in April and
May 1977 only two females did not return. One was Quelea, the
young matriarch of a small family of three; the other was
Trista.
I was in Amboseli for most of April and May, but during
those two months I did not see the TCs or TDs. I suspected
they were out of the park most of that time. On June 1 these
two families plus Tuskless and her group came through the
camp. When they caught my wind they became very nervous
and started hurrying through with trunks up in the air. This
was definitely unusual behavior for the Ts, who were probably,
along with the AAs, the most habituated females in the whole
population. I noticed that Trista and her baby were missing and
was immediately suspicious. That afternoon I drove out and
found them again and was able to do a complete census.
Everyone was there except Trista and her C’76.
I found these families again on June 4. When I approached,
they moved off. I noted:

1620 Teresia leads them away to the west. Others follow.
Trista and C’76 and Tania not here. Even Tuskless is
nervous and demonstrates. Trista must have been shot
because they’re unusually wary of the car.
1627 They have calmed down, but when another LandRover approached Tuskless got frightened and started
moving away fast although she was only a few feet from my
car and Teddy had even touched the car once. They fed all
around it and so seem to accept my Land-Rover but are still
wary of other vehicles.

83

84

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

On June 7 I found Tuskless and her C’76 in a big group of
130 elephants. With her was another ’76 calf, a female about
the same size as hers. On June 8 I found Tuskless and the two
babies again, plus Tallulah and Tonie. On this day the extra
baby was following Tallulah. I realized that it must be Trista’s.
I wrote in my notes:
1705 I wonder if this baby was on its own for a while because
it definitely was not with the TDs on the last sightings.
Where could it have been? It’s already thin and sunken
around the backbone. It slowly follows Tallulah.
On June 10 I was driving through the Longinye swamp
searching for elephants when I spotted a small group of four.
I drove to them and found Tania and her two calves with Tilly,
Torn Ear’s younger daughter. To my dismay Tania was clearly
very ill. My notes read:
1732 Tania looks sick — she’s standing doing nothing'—
her skin looks wrinkled and she’s hollow above the eyes. She
has at least two wounds on her left side — one near her
shoulder and the other high up behind her ear. She dusts
and feels the wounds.
1740 She starts to feed but not vigorously. She appears to
have stopped lactating, her breasts are small. There is a
third wound on her rump. They are small but pussy. Would
guess they’re bullet wounds rather than spear. Her two male
calves are sparring and playing vigorously nearby.
Just as I was about to leave, Tania walked right up to the side
of my Land-Rover to my window and just stood there, lifting
her eyelids from time to time and looking in at me. I do not
know what she was doing, but I sensed that she was somehow
trying to communicate her distress to me and I was very
touched and disturbed. There was, of course, nothing that I
could do.
It was particularly sad to see Tania wounded and Trista’s calf
getting weaker and weaker, because for everyone else life was
almost literally a huge picnic. There was a superabundance of

MIGRATION

food and after six months on a high-quality diet the elephants
were fat, healthy, and, to use a word that does not seem very
elephantine, frisky. The elephants were behaving in entirely
new ways and it was a joy to be with them. Each day I went out
I would see fat, happy elephants, doing amazingly silly things.
I came to call their general play behavior “being silly” because
it seemed to be as accurate a term as any.
Just three days before I found Tania, I had been out on the
western side of the park in the afternoon and spotted a large
group of about 150 elephants along the edge of the swamp.
Most of them were feeding and some were resting, but at 4:40
two animals started gently sparring and I was surprised to see
that they were females, something I had rarely recorded
before. They were Celeste and Calandre, two young females in
the CB family. Soon other pairs were sparring, young males
and calves and more females.
At five o’clock a tourist vehicle drove up and all the resting
animals woke up. Vida immediately charged the vehicle, which
sped off, followed by most of the VA group. Because the car did
not stick around to be an object of interest, they turned their
attention to my Land-Rover and began demonstrating at me. In
classic elephant defensive formation they formed a circle with
the big females out in front. They rumbled, flapped their ears,
shook their heads, and made mock charges at me. I could only
laugh at them, it was so obvious that they were not serious.
In the meantime even more animals had begun sparring and
chasing each other and generally running around making a
great deal of noise. It became like a three-ring circus and I
could only write down some of what I saw:
The ones that are playing are using the vegetation a lot,
throwing bits about, running through it.
Willa just chased a young female.
What is interesting is all the adult females playing. There
are just as many if not more young females being silly as
anyone else. One female has a whole small tree she’s tossing
around.
Virginia turns toward Lexi, practically kneels then sprays
moisture from her nose at him.

85

86

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

Calandre is one of the silliest of all. She charges a minibus by
crashing through the bushes.
They are expending an incredible amount of energy.
Even Grace is playing now. It’s an amazing sight. Grace
comes racing out, frightens herself when she almost runs
into me, really trumpets and scares everyone into running off.
Gloria and Gladys and others ran toward her when she
trumpeted, then they go tearing off running and play
trumpeting all across the open stretch to the arm of the
swamp.
I knew elephants well enough by then to realize that this was
not true fear or aggression. When elephants are frightened
they are usually silent. Everything about their postures, ges¬
tures, and vocalizations on this afternoon indicated high spirits
and playfulness. I drove home smiling and feeling lucky that I
had witnessed such a scene.
The death of Trista’s baby was inevitable, however, and I just
wished it would not take so long. The calf was ten and a half
months old when Trista was killed and it was impossible for her
to survive without her mother’s milk. The other females in the
family, particularly Tallulah, kept her close to them and did not
let her get separated again, but they had no milk, and so in the
end the calf grew thinner and weaker, and when I found the
family on June 22 she was gone. There have been stories of
elephants adopting calves when a mother has been killed, but I
think it is probably a rare event. Lactating females will some¬
times allow another female’s tiny calf (under two months old) to
suckle from them but they will not tolerate older calves. An
elephant has to produce a great volume of milk for her own calf
and under even the best of conditions she would simply not
have enough for an orphan without jeopardizing her own calf s
life.
The calf of Quelea, the other female who had been killed,
also died within a few months of losing her mother. In her case
closely bonded females from other families took care of her, as
there was only an older brother left in her own family. She was
a year old when her mother died, but this was still far too young
to survive without milk. Her older brother Quincy, at eight

MIGRATION

years old, had to become independent a few years earlier than
he would normally have, but he made the transition and is still
alive today. With the death of Quelea and her calf, the QA
family became defunct and the population now had 47 family
units.
I was very worried about Tania in the days that followed my
sighting of her in Longinye. When I saw her four days later,
on June 14, I was upset to see that she had other wounds that
I had not noticed before, one particularly bad one on her right
hind leg which was oozing pus. She was, however, back with
Tuskless and the others in the TA family and I took this as a
good sign. On June 18 1 found her again with Tuskless and
also Tallulah. I noted that she had a wet spot with blood
behind her left ear and that, sadly, while the others were
playing nearby, she stood quietly with her head hanging down.
Tallulah was “being silly,” shaking her head and sitting down
in a very ungainly posture.
I think that day must have been the turning point for Tania
because the following day I found her eating vigorously.
Although she was thin she was walking well. Over the next
month she continued to improve. (Tania was lucky. Elephants
have a problem with wounds. Their skin is so thick that often
the wound closes, or nearly closes, on the outside, preventing
proper drainage. The internal wound becomes septic and the
infection spreads throughout the body and kills the elephant.)
Although Tania recovered fully, she did not resume lactating.
Her C’73 was therefore weaned and needed a name. I called
him Toby.
Once Tania recovered, a realignment of bonds seemed to
take place among the four T families. Tania and Tuskless’s
families, the TAs and TBs, started to spend most of their time
together, moving in a group of eight. Without Torn Ear’s
leadership they turned to the lodge feeding station and the
garbage pits on a daily basis. Slit Ear and Teresia’s families, the
TCs and TDs, were not attracted to the garbage and continued
using their home range in their traditional patterns. These two
families, making up 13 animals, were almost always found
together in one of the most tightly knit of bond-group relation¬
ships. At the same time they began to spend less time with
Tuskless and Tania, probably because Torn Ear, who was Slit

87

88

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

Ear’s contemporary, was no longer there and because the TAs
and TBs had changed their daily movement patterns.
The group structure of the Ts, reduced to 21 animals, looked
like this at the end of 1977:
ta

ta

tc

td

Tuskless (62)
C’76
Teddy (66)

9
9

d

Tonie (67)

9

Tilly (70)

9

Tania (44)
Toby (73)
Taabu (69)

9

d
d

Slit Ear (36)
C’76
Tamar (71)
Tara (67)
Tess (63)

9
9
9
9
9

Tia (50)
C’76
Right Fang (70)

9

d
d

Teresia (22)
Tolstoy (71)
Theodora (67)

d

Tallulah (63)

9

Tim (69)

9
9

d

Mating

1978

3aibulu and Chris, medium-sized bulls in their mid-twenties,
raced at full speed in pursuit of Tia. She wove in and around
tree stumps and bushes and finally reached open ground,
where she took off running as fast as she could. The two males
followed close behind, but they did not seem to be as fast as
she was or perhaps as determined, and she began to draw
away from them. Tia made a large arc and by the time she
reached its apex she was 30 yards ahead of the males. She
slowed down but continued walking fast and at the comple¬
tion of the arc she arrived at the point where Slit Ear, Teresia,
and the others had reached. The males, standing out on the
plain, had given up and were temporarily resting from their
sprint.
When Tia returned to her family, the others rumbled at her
arrival. Her two-year-calf rushed up to her and opened his
mouth and let out a hoarse bellow. She touched his mouth with
her trunk and he moved closer and began to suckle. Tallulah
seemed particularly excited and came over and reached her

91

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

trunk toward Tia and smelled her and rumbled and then shook
her head.
Ten minutes later another medium-sized bull, Mac, ap¬
proached the family and began to test the females. When he
attempted to test Tia she moved off at a fast walk, with her head
held up, her ears lifted and slightly spread, looking back over
her shoulder at him. He immediately abandoned the other
females he had not yet tested and started after Tia. He released
his penis from its sheath and began to get an erection. Tia
walked out from the family and Mac followed at the same
speed, keeping about 20 yards behind her. When they were
about 150 yards away from the others, Tia stopped, and, still at
a distance of 20 yards, Mac stopped too. Tia stood for a while
picking the dusty soil up in her trunk and spraying it onto her
head and back. She was standing with her back toward Mac but
at a slight angle so that she was able to watch him. He took a few
steps toward her and immediately she began to walk away.
They continued on around in a circle until she came back to her
group.
By now the other two males, Saibulu and Chris, had returned
to the TCs and TDs and two younger males had joined them.
Tallulah came out to meet these young males and briefly
engaged one in a sparring match. Afterward she rubbed her
head against Chris’s hindquarters and then stood among the
five males. She seemed agitated and alert. The males, however,
were not interested in her. When Tia had been back in her
group for only a few minutes she was chased by all three of the
medium males. She ran flat out again and managed to get away.
The sequence of either running or walking after Tia oc¬
curred many more times in the course of the morning, but
none of these males ever got close enough to touch her.
Sometimes her calf ran with her when she was chased, desper¬
ately trying to keep up. Eventually he learned to stay back with
the other females. When the group stopped in the shade of an
acacia tree, the bulls rested as well. Later in the afternoon the
pursuit resumed, and at 4:30 Tia was finally caught by Chris in
thick habitat where it was difficult to run. Chris managed to
stop her and mount, but Tia kept moving sideways and he was
unable to penetrate. At the same time Tia’s family came
running over and, surrounding the pair, they rumbled and

MATING

trumpeted. Chris ejaculated all over the back of Tia’s legs and
dismounted.
Tia stood with her head low, looking tired after all the
running she had done during the day. She had had very little
time to feed and was harassed even when she tried to drink.
Soon most of her family drifted away to begin feeding again,
leaving Tia and Tallulah resting. Chris also stood quietly
nearby. Tallulah remained alert and was the first of the females
to hear the low rumbling sound almost like an engine far in the
distance. When Tallulah rumbled in response, Tia listened and
could also hear the distant sound. They waited tensely, listen¬
ing, and after about ten minutes they could smell the sharp,
acrid, unmistakable odor of a musth bull — a large, sexually
active male elephant in full rut.
Tia and Tallulah watched the arrival of Bad Bull with great
interest. He was a massive animal with two jaggedly broken
tusks and a large V notch out of the bottom of his right ear.
About 45 years old, he stood at least two feet taller than the
medium-sized bulls and his head, particularly his forehead and
the space between his tusks, was extraordinarily broad. His
temporal glands, one on each side of his face, located midway
between the eye and ear, were grotesquely swollen and secret¬
ing a copious, viscous fluid. His smell, almost intoxicating to the
females, originated from the temporal glands and from the
area of his penis and sheath. He was dribbling urine continu¬
ously, spurting it out at a very fast rate. His sheath was covered
in a greenish white scum and his inner legs were black with
wetness.
Even though they had all heard and smelled him coming, his
arrival caused a considerable commotion. He walked straight
for the females, carrying his head high, tucking his chin in, and
waving his ears in a characteristic musth male posture. He did
not bother to drape his trunk over his tusk and lower his head
to reassure the females. They were both attracted and alarmed.
First they rumbled a greeting to him, and as he got closer they
milled about, turning and backing, some reaching their trunks
toward him, others urinating. Even the young calves were
fascinated and came over to smell him. The males who had
been surrounding Tia, more or less waiting for her next move,
immediately ambled off to the periphery of the group, where
\

93

94

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

they started to feed, “pretending” that they had no interest in
Tia, but all the time positioning themselves so that they could
; keep an eye on her and Bad Bull.
Bad Bull did not test the other females, even though Tallulah
kept placing herself right in front of him. Tia had walked off a
few paces in the characteristic estrous posture of ears held out
tensely, head up and turned slightly, looking back over her
shoulder, and he noticed her immediately. He turned toward
her and approached. As soon as she had his attention, she
began to walk faster, heading away from the others. He too
picked up speed and at the same time his penis emerged from
its sheath and dropped down, nearly touching the ground.
Tia began to run, but not fast and not with the determined
intensity with which she ran when chased by the younger bulls.
Bad Bull quickly caught up with her. He reached out with his
trunk and placed it along her back. She stopped immediately.
He moved his trunk forward to the top of her head until his
head and tusks were over her hindquarters. Then, using his
head as a lever, he reared up, placing his front feet on her
backside but sinking back so that nearly his whole weight was on
his hind legs. His penis had hardened, changing in shape from
a simple arc to an S-shaped double bend. It curved out from the
sheath, then down, and then curved back up at the tip. Fully
extended and erect, it measured almost four feet and was
endowed with musculature allowing directional control. Bad
Bull whipped it about, searching for Tia’s vulva, which hung
low between her legs with the opening facing the ground, not
up under her tail as in most ungulates. Tia backed in closer and
spread her legs. The S-shaped curve of the penis now came into
play. Bad Bull sunk down even farther and hooked the tip of
his penis into the opening and thrust upward, forcing the full
length of the penis into the vagina, at the same time lifting the
whole vulva and protuberant clitoris at least a foot. Tia stayed
still and they held this posture for about 45 seconds, after which
Bad Bull dismounted and withdrew his penis with a gush of
semen.
Tia stepped forward with legs still spread, opened her
mouth, and uttered a very deep, loud sound, more like a bellow
than a rumble. Her family came running over, flapping their
ears and rumbling, screaming and trumpeting in a great

MATING

outburst of vocalizations. They extended their trunks toward
her, some to her mouth, others to her genitals. Tia turned back
to Bad Bull and reached her trunk in the direction of his penis,
which, although no longer fully erect, still hung down free of
the sheath. She then turned and stood parallel to him and
rubbed her head against his shoulder. The members of her
family began to calm down but Tia continued to give repeated
low, long, pulsated rumbles for the next ten minutes, and
occasionally reached her trunk to touch Bad Bull’s penis or to
smell the sperm on the ground. Tallulah remained close to the
pair and still showed some excitement. After a while, she
moved in close to Bad Bull and stood on his other side.
Bad Bull stayed with Tia for the rest of the afternoon and all
through the night. At the same time Tia made sure she was
never more than a few feet from him. With him there she could
feed and drink and rest without being harassed by the other
bulls. They did not mate again until the next morning and this
time Tia did not even run from Bad Bull to start the sequence,
but once again her family raced over with excitement and Tia
made the long, low post-copulatory rumbles afterward. By
morning there were eight other bulls with the TCs and TDs, all
being very discreet about their interest in Tia, in fear of
reprisals from Bad Bull. Several times in the night a male would
try to inch in close to the pair, and Bad Bull would lunge at him,
sending him running off with a groaning sound. A few times
Tia wandered a couple of yards away while feeding, but as soon
as a male tried to approach she moved straight back to Bad
Bull.
They stayed in consort throughout the next two days and
mated only one more time. By the fourth day Bad Bull began
to lose interest in Tia. She tried to maintain the consort
relationship with him but he did not guard her with the same
enthusiasm and eventually he allowed the other bulls to sepa¬
rate her from him. Soon after, he left the TCs and TDs and
strode off in search of other estrous females. Without a
protector, Tia was once more harassed and chased by the
younger bulls. But once again Tia was determined to get away
from them and although they were relentless in their pursuit,
she was able to evade all but one of them. Hector, a fairly big
bull, managed to run her down and mate with her, but the

95

96

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

chances of being impregnated by him were low, as she was now
at the end of her estrous period. By the following morning the
bulls had lost interest in her and they too left the family. Tia
returned to her confused and weary calf and resumed the
normal routine of elephant family life.
The very next day, Tallulah, who had been stimulated by the
presence of the males and the sexual activity, hnally came into
estrus herself. She was 15 years old and had never been in
estrus before. Although she had carefully watched Tia and Slit
Ear (who had been in consort with Bad Bull the week before
Tia), when Tallulah actually came into estrus herself she
seemed to have forgotten everything she might have learned
from her observations.
From the moment the males started to show an interest in her
she lost her head completely. She ran off in a panic whenever
one got within 20 yards of her. Being young and lighter than
the males, she was fast and agile and was able to outrun them,
but she soon began to tire because of her total lack of discrim¬
ination of which males were serious and which were not. She
eventually got caught and mated by an insignificant young
male, Ed, whom Slit Ear and Tia would never have allowed to
catch them. Tallulah rumbled and moaned and screamed
throughout the mating and stood with her mouth wide open
and bellowed after Ed dismounted. Her family dutifully came
running over and vocalized and demonstrated with her. Pre¬
dictably this attracted even more males.
Within the next half hour Tallulah and her family were
surrounded by 17 adult males. Singly, in pairs, and sometimes
in threes and fours, they chased Tallulah and eventually
completely separated her from her family. She was chased over
and over again, once for over a mile, and she was caught and
mounted again but unsuccessfully. The male could not gain
intromission and Tallulah managed to wriggle out from under
him and run off once again. This behavior continued on and
off for the rest of the afternoon and into the night. Fortunately
for Tallulah, the males got tired as well, and there were periods
when they all, Tallulah included, stood in a group and rested.
Finally, around 4:00 a.m., a large adult male in musth, Ajax,
found Tallulah, quickly dispersed her suitors, and mated with
her. She gave the characteristic deep, pulsating rumble after

MATING

the mating, but since her family was now several miles away, she
got no response from them.
Tallulah stood with Ajax after they had mated and looked as
though she were going to go into a consortship with him. She
followed him when he took a few steps forward and she even
rubbed her head against him. However, after about half an
hour, some of the more aggressive bulls moved in closer and
Tallulah began to get nervous. Ajax was resting with his eyes
closed and two of the males, RBG and Ml35, slowly snuck up
behind him. Instead of sticking close to Ajax’s side as a more
experienced female would have done, Tallulah panicked and
ran off, with RBG and Ml35 in hot pursuit. Ajax woke up and
ran after them. They were out on an open plain and all four
elephants were running at a terrific speed, kicking up a great
cloud of dust. After about 150 yards, RBG caught up with
Tallulah, stopped her, and mounted. Just as he was hooking his
penis into her vulva, Ajax arrived at a run, came straight for
RBG, rammed him with the broad part of his head, and pushed
him off Tallulah. RBG staggered away for a few yards before
he gained his footing and spun around, and with head held
high and ears spread, he started back toward Ajax. Ajax in turn
raised himself to his full height and spread his ears. They both
stopped and faced each other. Then Ajax stepped forward, at
the same time folding his ears horizontally and forming a ridge
across the ear. RBG stood his ground for a few moments before
taking a step back and turning and walking off rapidly. Ajax
followed for about 20 yards and then turned back toward
Tallulah.
In the meantime, Ml35 had taken advantage of the two
males’ interaction and was pursuing Tallulah across the plain.
Ajax quickly caught up with them and Ml35 immediately
veered off. Tallulah was so agitated and confused that she
continued to run away and Ajax gave up and slowed to a walk.
Tallulah finally came to a halt 100 yards farther on and stood
by herself.
Tallulah was in estrus for five days in all and for most of that
time she was chased by males. Several males mated with her,
including Ajax again. She started to get the idea of a consort
relationship by the third day and began to try to stay with Ajax,
but the males seemed aware that they could intimidate her and

97

98

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

were usually able to separate her from him. Ajax had to spend
most of his time threatening other males who tried to come in
close and this almost inevitably led to Tallulah being chased off
by yet other males.
On the fifth day of her estrous period Tallulah was no longer
of interest to the larger males, and she was chased and harassed
by young males in their early twenties. Eventually they too
ceased to find her attractive and she was able to wander off in
search of her family. She went to the Ol Tukai Orok woodlands
and, using her trunk to smell both the wind and the ground,
she tried to track her family down. She moved along the
well-used elephant paths, snaking her trunk along the ground
and smelling as she went. Every once in a while she stopped and
uttered a very low, long, drawn-out rumble, and then stood still
and listened. When she got to the southern end of the wood¬
lands at the edge of an open plain she suddenly stopped short
and intently smelled the ground at her feet. Her temporal
glands began to flow until the sides of her face from the gland
down to her chin were black from the liquid. She started
moving fast now, keeping her trunk to the ground. She
rumbled gently every 15 seconds. When she had covered about
500 yards in this way she stopped again, raised her trunk,
smelled the wind, and rumbled louder. Off in the long elephant
grass on the far side of the plain came an answering rumble.
Tallulah took off running, covering another 500 yards until she
reached the long grass. The members of her family, also
streaming from their temporal glands, had started out to meet
her and she raced into the middle of them as Teresia, Theo¬
dora, and some of the others reached out their trunks and
greeted her with loud rumbles, trumpets, and many ear flaps.
Tallulah opened her mouth and gave forth a resounding
rumble of reunion.
When the good rains came in 1977 and continued into 1978,
along with them came such a profusion of sexual activity that at
times it seemed like a bacchanalian debauch. But oddly enough,
before the Amboseli study little was known about elephant
reproductive behavior in the wild. Very few matings had been
witnessed and documented and many people concluded that
elephants mated only at night or were very secretive about it in

MATING

the daytime. During Iain Douglas-Hamilton’s four-and-a-halfyear study in Lake Manyara he saw elephants mating only four
times and saw females who were “apparently” in estrus on ten
occasions. This was difficult to understand because there were
many births during his study, so the elephants had to be
mating. Another scientist working on elephants, Roger Short,
offered a substantial reward to 50 rangers in a Uganda park if
they could find a female in estrus for him. In over four months
of searching they could not find one. In the end he happened
upon one himself and watched her behavior for two days, and,
interested in the physiological aspects of reproduction, he then
shot her and collected her reproductive organs. Short con¬
cluded that there were no external signs of estrus and that the
only way estrus could be detected was by seeing an elephant
being mated.
I started my study with no preconceived ideas about elephant
sexual behavior, but I did not expect to observe it frequently. I
had seen only one mating while working with Iain in Manyara.
During the part-time study in Amboseli, Harvey and I saw
several matings at close range on one day in 1974 and we were
very excited and pleased to be able to witness them. Over the
course of six hours, a young female, Katrineka (named after
Harvey’s daughter), was chased by 12 males and caught and
mated four times by a large male, M2. Aside from the fact that
she was chased and mated, we could see that she showed no
external signs of estrus, just as Short had reported. Her vulva
was not swollen, nor did she have any discharge.
During the rest of the part-time study, on one or two
occasions I saw females being pursued by males, but I did not
see any other matings. After I moved to Amboseli in September
1975 and began my more intensive observations, I might have
expected to see more reproductive activity but I did not.
During the whole of 1976 I observed only one mating and saw
females showing unusual behavior, which I suspected indicated
that they were in estrus, on two occasions. At the time this
seemed normal, given the record of other elephant workers.
What I did not realize was that I was not seeing estrous
behavior in 1975-76 because, as a result of the drought, very
few females were coming into estrus. Once the drought broke
at the end of 1976 and abundant vegetation became available,

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

the females picked up in condition and started cycling again.
Starting in February 1977 I began to see estrous behavior on
a regular basis. By then I had been observing the Amboseli
elephants for four and a half years and knew them fairly well.
Although I had been watching them during drought years
when they had been relatively listless, I could detect odd
nuances of behavior that indicated a female was not acting in a
normal way. I always recorded unusual behavior whenever I
saw it and continued to do so even though there seemed to be
a great deal of it in 1977. However, “being silly” was one thing,
while acting in a peculiar way only in relation to males was
another. Once I became sensitive to estrous behavior, I saw it
frequently. In 1977 and 1978 I observed estrous behavior on 80
different occasions, during which I saw 19 matings. But mating
was not the key indicator of estrus. Other behavior was more
common. Eventually I divided the behavioral components of
estrus into five categories: 1) wariness; 2) the estrous walk; 3)
the chase; 4) the mounting; and 5) consortship.
With older, experienced females, such as Tia, there was a
definite pattern to estrus, which lasted from two to six days,
with an average of about four days. On the first day or two the
female is wary of males and tries to avoid their approaches.
During this period there are frequent estrous walks and chases,
and if the female gets mated she and her family vocalize loudly
and generally make a big commotion. All this activity attracts
more males, which is most likely the purpose. During what
might be considered the second stage of estrus the female is
found by a large male and mates and goes into consort with
him. Consorts last from a few hours up to three days. It is a
relatively quiet period, during which the male and female
maintain close proximity and the female is usually not chased
by other males. A third stage of estrus often occurs after the
consortship ends, when the female is again pursued by younger
males.
In the case of young, inexperienced females who have never,
or only once or twice, been in estrus before, the normal
behavioral pattern is disrupted completely. These young fe¬
males, such as Tallulah, get chased and harassed throughout
the estrous period and are often repeatedly mated by a series of
bulls of all ages. It would appear that, as with so much else

MATING

related to elephants, consort behavior is something that is
learned with experience.
At the same time that I began to piece together the compo¬
nents of estrous behavior in the females, I was beginning to
take more of an interest in the males. I am always being accused
of being a female chauvinist in that I supposedly neglect the
male elephants. While my study dehnitely has concentrated on
the cows and calves, and while it is true that males were
assigned numbers and females were given names, I can explain
it all. It goes back to my time with Iain in Manyara. He named
the females and numbered the males and I simply continued
the tradition. In my case it was difficult enough finding over
300 female names, each with a unique three-letter code,
without adding male names as well. As it turned out I named
many of the males, but used their numbers on the computer
coding sheets. Iain also influenced my way of looking at
elephants. He definitely focused on the females and concen¬
trated on their social organization. I too found the intricate
relationships among the females and their complex social
structure intriguing, and that is what I wanted to study when I
did my own research project.
By the end of the part-time study, Harvey and I had
photographed about 100 adult males. We considered males
adults once they had left their natal family units. Males reach
sexual maturity around 10 to 12 years of age and leave their
families at anywhere from 10 to 19, with the average age of
independence at 14. I continued to photograph males when I
started my full-time study and continued to collect data on
where individuals were, whether in all-bull groups or with cows
and calves, and so forth. I did not spend much time actually
watching their behavior, except when they were with females.
In October 1975, a few weeks after I set up my camp in
Amboseli, Bob Poole, director of the African Wildlife Founda¬
tion, which I was working for and was sponsoring me, came to
visit me with his family. Bob had a 19-year-old daughter, Joyce,
who was at Smith College (coincidentally my own alma mater)
in the United States but who was spending a year in Africa
before returning to her studies. She was a zoology major and
planned to take courses at the University of Nairobi, hoping to
gain some field experience with African wildlife. Bob asked if

101

102

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

she could work with me and I gladly agreed. He made
arrangements, receiving permission from the Wildlife Depart¬
ment, and Joyce came to stay for three months during 1976.
From the beginning I felt that Joyce was a colleague rather than
a research assistant and I decided to give her a project to do. I
assigned her to the bulls. That was the beginning of a long and
very fruitful collaboration which continues to this day. I might
add that Joyce never felt that she was given the less interesting
sex to study. Quite the contrary.
Part of Joyce’s work involved bringing the recognition hie for
the bulls up to date. She took more photographs and worked
with the photographs that I had not yet sorted. I had devised a
different filing system for the bulls from that of the cows, using
a punched-card method. A friend, Chris Hillman, had used
these cards in his study of eland and had suggested it might
work well with elephants. Each card had 102 numbered holes
running around the entire outer edge. I made a key, assigning
various recognition factors to the numbers, such as “large hole
in left ear,” or “right tusk higher than left.” Three of the holes
indicated three general size classes of the bulls — young, me¬
dium, and large. Each bull’s characteristics were assessed and
the holes for these characteristics cut through on his card.
Thus, out in the held, when I came across a medium-sized bull
with a large V out of his right ear and a broken left tusk but I
did not know who he was, I could take the stack of cards, run
a spike through the hole for “V nick right,” and all the cards for
bulls with that characteristic would fall out from the bottom of
the pack. I could then take those cards that had fallen out, run
the spike through the hole for “right broken tusk,” and more
cards would fall out. If the number of cards that dropped down
was still many, I could run the spike through the hole for
medium-sized bull. By that time only a few cards would
probably fall out and I could just quickly look through them.
This system worked well for the bulls because a bull could be
anywhere and with anyone and thus there were no clues as to
who he was other than his ears, tusks, and size. The cow
pictures were pasted onto plain cards and carried in alphabet¬
ical order by their family. If one member of the family could be
recognized, that provided a huge clue and the pictures of that
family could be taken out of the hie to compare with the

MATING

elephants present. Eventually we put the cows onto punched
cards as well, and new researchers used the system when they
were first learning the elephants.
Back in 1976 Joyce worked hard on updating the punchedcard system for the bulls and soon learned most of the medium
and large bulls. (The young bulls who all seemed to have
perfectly smooth ears and symmetrical tusks took quite a while
longer. Between us, plus two other researchers, we completed
their cards only a few years ago.) Joyce also went out and
watched bulls and found them in new places where I generally
did not go because they were not areas that the cows and calves
used frequently. I often wondered where the bulls were when
they were not with cows and what they were doing.
In Manyara Iain had noted that he would see a large bull in
the park with the cows and calves for a couple of months and
then he would not see the bull again for perhaps a year. Other
bulls seemed to live in the park but not mix with the females
very often. He suspected that there might be a sexual cycle in
the bulls but did not detect a definite pattern. I too tended to
see a big bull for a space of time and then not see him again. I
never knew whether the bull had been killed or if he was just
away somewhere and would come back.
One day in early March 1976 Joyce and I were out in my
Land-Rover when we came across a very large bull, the biggest
so far recorded by us in Amboseli. He was with an aggregation
of cows, calves, and younger bulls and towered over them all.
He had just pushed down a small acacia tree and the EA family
was feeding on it with him. Evangeline of the EAs was being
wary of males and at one point was pursued by several, but not
by this huge old male. I had seen him only twice before, and
that was in the previous month. He had been assigned number
103. I assumed he was one of the bulls that left for long periods
of time and was currently on a visit to Amboseli. We noticed
that he was constantly dribbling urine, as if there were some
malfunction of the sphincter muscle that controlled its flow. We
knew he was an old bull because he was so large. (Elephants
grow throughout their lifetime, and thus the larger an elephant
is the older it is.) We thought M103 was so old that he had
become incontinent.
We saw M103 again a few days later, still dribbling urine. He

103

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

•

was with a large group of over 100 elephants that included the
EAs and Evangeline, who was still being chased by other bulls.
We decided to call him Zeus because he was the biggest of all
the males, but we never used his name; that was the last time we
ever saw him.
On the morning of March 26, I found another large bull,
Ml 17, dribbling urine. He was with seven other bulls. Later in
the morning when I was with a small group of cows and calves
a few miles away, he suddenly arrived and tested one of the
females who had been acting wary and coy around the males
that were already there. The next day I found Ml 17 with
another group of cows and calves. He was still dribbling and in
my notes I wrote:
It looks like green pus coming out of the opening to the
sheath and penis.
On March 30 Joyce and I were out again together and found
the AA family with many bulls, including Ml 17 (“the bull with
the dripping penis,” as I wrote in my notes). By now his sheath
had turned a greenish-white color and gave off a very sharp,
pungent odor, which was not unpleasant, but very strong. We
were convinced that he had a dreadful disease and started to
refer to his condition as “green penis disease.” The unfortunate
bull himself was called Green Penis. I was disturbed that there
appeared to be a disease passing among the bulls, but I really
became alarmed later in the morning when Green Penis began
to show interest in a female who seemed to be in estrus. We saw
that his intentions were clearly sexual when he got an erection
and followed her into a small grove of trees. Joyce and I both
noticed that about a third of his penis had also turned green. I
was sure he was going to give the disease to one of my females
and envisioned a nasty epidemic sweeping through the whole
population.
Joyce saw Green Penis two more times, on April 1 and 2. On
April 2 she came back and told me, “I smelled him before I
even saw him.” Joyce did not see him again before she left
Amboseli on April 10 and I did not see him again for the rest
of 1976. To my relief, I did not find any signs of a female
version of “green penis disease” in the next months.

MATING

On June 13, 1976,1 discovered another bull with green penis
disease. He was big, with a broken right tusk and a large V nick
out of the bottom of his right ear. I noticed that his temporal
glands were streaming, which seemed unusual for a big male.
He was with the VA family. I saw him again on June 30, still
with streaming temporal glands, and this time I noted that
“This bull is dribbling urine like Zeus.” I saw him one more
time with females in September and then not again for the rest
of the year. He was photographed and assigned number 126.
Four months later, in early January 1977, I found Ml 26 and
was relieved to see that he had recovered from the green penis
disease and was no longer dribbling. I sighted him three more
times in the next three months and each time he was with males
and seemed fine. In February I found yet another male, M22,
with green penis and streaming temporal glands. He was with
females and seemed interested in the adult female Delia, whom
I suspected was in estrus. It began to look as if there were some
connection between green penis, or GP for short, and sexual
activity.
Later in the year I began to see another side of GP — one
that directly affected me and was not at all to my liking. My first
inkling of it was on April 2, 1977. I found a group of about 50
elephants near the Enkongo Narok swamp. With the cows and
calves were three or four good-sized bulls and the biggest was
Ml07, David. I wrote in my notes:
David deliberately comes over to the car twice, coming close
and gently threatening by standing tall. The first time I
moved the car he followed. He definitely has GP disease and
he already smells. He let the females go by and then came
back to threaten me. If I didn’t know better I’d say he was
guarding “his herd.”
I meant by “if I didn’t know better” that it was clear from all
the previous work that had been done on elephants by Iain,
Harvey, and others that there was no such thing as a “herd bull”
who stayed with a particular family in a harem system. An
individual bull never spent more than a few days with any
particular family. I had observed the same pattern, but on that
day David was definitely being aggressive, which in itself was

105

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

•

unusual for an Amboseli elephant, and he seemed to be trying
to keep me from getting close to the females.
On June 2, 1977, I met the big, broken-tusked, V-nick right
bull, Ml 26, again. He was with a large herd of over 50 cows and
calves and at least 12 bulls. The bulls were trailing along at the
rear of the group and among them was one young female.
Ml26, along with my favorite of the big bulls, Cyclops, who was
a one-tusker, and Pablo, were rubbing against one another and
appeared to be playfully sparring. It was a quiet, peaceful
scene, with the elephants slowly walking toward the swamp. I
pulled my vehicle up parallel to their movement, turned the
engine off, and watched the group go by. As M126 came past
he suddenly whirled around and came for me with head down
and with no hesitation. He stopped about ten feet from the car,
stood tall with his ears spread, and towered over me. There was
nothing I could do. It was too late to start the car, for I feared
that would provoke him. After a short time, he turned away
and walked on to join the others.
I moved my car to follow the group to the swamp edge. As I
came around a corner I met Ml26 and he charged me again. I
thought he was just feeling rambunctious, for there had been
sparring among the males and a lot of playing among the
younger animals. I drove on ahead to meet the group as it
arrived. I drove down the track about 500 yards and then off
the road, winding down through the trees and bushes until I
was in thick regenerating acacias at the edge of the swamp. I sat
there for a while watching the females arrive at the water.
Suddenly I got a funny feeling in the back of my neck, looked
in my rearview mirror, and found it filled with dark-gray
wrinkled hide. I spun around in my seat and there was Ml26
bearing down on me. I started the car and just managed to get
through a gap in the bushes in order to turn the car around to
get back into the open. Ml26 was right at my tail and as I wove
through the trees he actually tried to head me off.
I got into the clear area and with speed left Ml26 behind. I
then stopped the car and sat there shaking for a while. I
decided that I could not let him get away with it. When cows or
bulls were aggressive toward Iain in Manyara, where aggression
was far more common than in Amboseli, Iain would either
stand his ground or actually go on the offensive. I remembered

MATING

being with Iain on several occasions when a nasty male, whom
Iain called Mr. Big, charged and threatened us. Iain would start
the car, rev the engine, and charge him, and much to my relief
Mr. Big always backed down. I thought, “Cynthia, if you want
to study elephants you can’t let this elephant intimidate you.
You have to show him that you are dominant.” Ml26 was
standing about 50 yards away, keeping his eye on me. I turned
the car around and headed straight for him with as much speed
as I could get up over the rough ground. As I headed toward
him he started to come for me with head down, trunk curled in,
and ears folded. We got closer and closer and at the last second
I veered off. I turned the car around and charged him again,
but once more I was the one who veered off. Each time he
swung after me and chased me at full speed. I had little doubt
that he would carry through his charge. I drove on till he gave
up and stopped the car once again, trembling but also feeling a
heady rush of adrenaline.
I was angry and upset but also curious about what he had
done. I turned back down the road to where he had charged
me the second time and found his footprints going straight
along the road and the trail of his trunk snaking along the
ground over my tire marks as he tracked me. He had left the
other elephants and had deliberately followed me for nearly
half a mile, first along the road and then along my winding
route in and around the trees and bushes to the swamp edge.
None of the other elephants had taken this route, which was
indirect. I found this behavior totally strange, surprising, and
not a little creepy. From that moment on I thought of him as
“The Bad Bull,” and that became his name.
I refused to give in entirely to my fear and stayed with that
herd for another two hours but kept looking over my shoulder.
The bush was too thick to know where Bad Bull was at all times.
In fact I did not see him for more than an hour after our
confrontation and when I did find him he was with the young
female who had been with the bulls earlier on. She seemed wary
and nervous and I thought she was probably in estrus. In the
confusion of the events I had not written down whether or not
Bad Bull had green penis but I remembered that the sides of
his face had been covered with thick viscous secretions from his
temporal glands, which is almost always associated with GP.

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

Joyce came back for several weeks during her summer
vacation in 1977 and started to fill in some important parts of
the bull puzzle. We were both beginning to wonder whether
green penis was really a disease, but we were confused about its
occurrence. Joyce went out searching for bulls every day and
found them in places where I did not usually go. She discovered
definite bull areas, where single bulls or small groups of bulls
spent their time feeding and resting. It was here that Joyce
came across the bulls that “disappeared.” It seemed that for
much of the year the large bulls spent time away from females
in all-bull groups. It was beginning to look as if we had
something similar to the sexual cycle that Iain had suggested.
What was particularly intriguing was that GP seemed to have
some relation to the cycle.
In the next six months I continued to collect data on GP and
estrous behavior among the females. I saw several more bulls
with GP and each time they were with females and often they
were with a female in estrus. Joyce came out for Christmas
vacation and spent two weeks in Amboseli. By now we were
calling the phenomenon “green penis syndrome” instead of
“disease.” She was very excited about the data that I had
collected during her time away and felt sure that something
significant was going on. Just before she returned to the United
States, she had lunch with Harvey, who by coincidence had just
received a paper on Asian elephants. He handed it to her to
look at. Joyce leafed through it quickly and then suddenly
stopped dead, staring at one picture, and said, “Oh my God,
that’s it!” The paper was on the phenomenon of musth in the
Asian elephant and the picture was of a bull in full musth.
Arrows pointed to his streaming temporal glands and to his wet
legs and dribbling urine.
The paper described the characteristics of musth, a Hindi
word referring to the physiological and psychological state that
male elephants come into periodically. The most obvious
characteristics are the swelling of, and copious discharge from,
the temporal glands, the continuous discharge of urine, and a
sharp rise in aggressive behavior. Musth bulls have always been
notorious among domestic working Asian elephants and in
circuses and zoos throughout the world. They have to be
isolated and chained up and are usually given reduced feed

MATING

until they go out of musth. Further studies in Asia showed that
musth is accompanied by high levels of the male hormone
testosterone in the blood.
In the Asian male elephant musth is confined to those bulls
that have reached puberty. An individual male often comes into
musth around the same time each year and it usually lasts for
two to three months. The occurrence is unsynchronized; that is,
males do not all come into it at the same time. In wild Asian
male elephants there is a positive association with female herds
during musth. Scientists who studied it in the Asian elephant
concluded that the phenomenon is similar to rutting behavior
in deer, with the main difference being the lack of synchrony.
There is a definite mating season among deer, during which all
the adult males go into rut and the females come into estrus.
Female elephants, however, come into estrus throughout the
year.
When Joyce read the paper Harvey gave her and some other
related papers, everything began to fall into place. She came
back in the summer of 1978 and followed both musth and
non-musth males. Bad Bull, right on schedule, came into musth
in June, July, and August for the third year in a row, and gave
Joyce a very bad time. She was extremely frightened at first and
came back to camp white-faced and shaken on many occasions,
but Joyce is one of the most determined people I know and she
continued to go out with the elephants. If Bad Bull saw her with
a herd of cows and calves he would come for her car, sometimes
from over 400 yards away. Often she would leave but circle
around and watch from another point. If he was in consort with
an estrous female he was usually unable to chase Joyce because
if he left the female the other males would race in to claim her.
He would continue to glower at Joyce and threaten her if she
came close enough, but under these conditions Joyce could
make observations from a distance. Fortunately, some other
bulls, who were more tolerant of her presence, were also in
musth that summer and she was able to collect valuable data on
their behavior.
By the end of the summer of 1978 Joyce and I knew that
musth occurred in the African elephant, but to understand the
phenomenon more fully a detailed study needed to be carried
out. Joyce went back to college, wrote up the work she had done

109

110

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

on the bulls thus far for her honors thesis, and graduated in
June 1979. Like me, she was completely hooked on elephants
and was totally fascinated by their complex lives. She registered
for a Ph.D. at Cambridge University to work under the
well-known animal behaviorist Robert Hinde, whom I had met
in Manyara and kept in touch with over the years. With grants
from the New York Zoological Society and Smith College Joyce
came out to Amboseli in January 1980 and carried out an
18-month field study on musth.
At the end of 1980, with five years of accumulated data on
individual bulls, we wrote a joint paper for the journal Nature
announcing the discovery of musth in the African elephant.
The big question our colleagues and others wanted to know was
why it had never been noticed in African elephants before.
There seemed to be several reasons.
The main confusion centered on the temporal-gland secre¬
tions. In the Asian elephant, primarily males secrete and only
when they are in musth. Females very rarely secrete. African
elephants, on the other hand, secrete from the temporal glands
frequently and the females more often than the males. Females
secrete in all seasons and throughout the year, but most
frequently in the dry season. We and others have speculated
that the females use the secretion as a means of communication.
It may be a way of keeping members of families and bond
groups in touch when they are fragmented while feeding in
thick bush or at considerable distance from one another. The
secretion probably has an individual odor, and elephants, with
their excellent sense of smell, might use it to find one another.
When a single elephant is separated from its family it almost
invariably has fresh temporal-gland secretion. Calves of both
sexes from about six months old also secrete, but as males get
older they do so less often, and as full adults they usually
secrete only when they are in musth, and then the liquid seems
thicker and of a different consistency. Since temporal-gland
secretion is one of the main signs of the onset of musth in the
Asian elephant, when observers in Africa saw females and
calves with secretions, they concluded that it served a different
purpose and that musth did not occur in the African elephant.
Other elephant observers, including Iain, had seen males
dribbling urine, but they had not associated it with a specific

MATING

physiological state. Most of the other people who had studied
African elephants had examined the carcasses of elephants shot
on culling and cropping schemes. Very few scientists had
watched individually known live animals over several years.
Joyce and I believed that this was the key to why we were able
to discover musth. We watched known bulls, with GP and
temporal-gland secretions, appear in the areas used by cows,
exhibiting sexual interest in females and acting aggressively
toward males, and then a few months later we saw the same
bulls with no external symptoms quietly spending their time
with males. When we observed this for several years in a row we
could not help but see a pattern. As it turns out, once we
described the phenomenon in the African elephant, people
started seeing it in elephant populations in other places.
The next question after the simple discovery of musth was
what its function and significance was. No other mammals
exhibit this type of phenomenon. In most species in which
females are sexually receptive at all times of year, males pursue
or at least guard females throughout the year (e.g., lions,
zebras, baboons). In those species in which females are receptive
for only a short breeding season males in turn are sexually
active only during that time (e.g., wildebeests, deer). It is a
generally accepted theory that an individual’s main goal is to
pass on its genes to as many offspring as possible in the course
of its lifetime. Animals use different strategies to try to achieve
that result, but a first look at the sexual-activity cycle of male
elephants would indicate that they were acting counterproductively to the goal. Females are in estrus all the year in Amboseli,
with the majority of them in estrus from January through July.
But a big male like Bad Bull, who theoretically could be
pursuing females from January through July, was actively
pursuing them only during June, July, and August. Why? And
what possible advantage could dribbling and smelling have for
a male?
Joyce set out in her Ph.D. study to try to come up with some
of the answers. It would take a whole other book
and
someday I hope Joyce will write it
to talk about male strate¬
gies, but I want to describe some of the things that Joyce found
and her theories as to why they happen. Joyce has basically
concluded that musth evolved as a result of competition for

112

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

females. In polygynous species, in which males compete inten¬
sively to mate with females, there is usually a marked sexual
dimorphism, with males growing significantly bigger than
females. Male elephants (at 11 to 12 feet at the shoulder and
12,000 pounds) are almost twice the size of females (at eight
feet at the shoulder and 6000 pounds), which suggests that in
the evolution of this species bigger males were more successful
in mating with females and they then passed on their genes to
their male offspring, who in turn inherited their fathers’ large
size, and the biggest among these sons again produced more
offspring. Eventually, given intrinsic and ecological constraints
(such as a limit to the amount of food a huge animal could find
and consume), male elephants got as big as they could. Musth
may then have evolved to add another dimension in the
competition for females.
In Amboseli we divided adult males into six age classes: la)
11-15; lb) 16-20; 2) 21-25; 3) 26-35; 4) 36-50; and 5) 50 + .
Males reach sexual maturity at about twelve years old, at which
age they are capable of producing viable sperm, and theoreti¬
cally could mate and impregnate a female. In the wild it would
be a very rare event. Neither the adult females nor the older
males would tolerate them. Young males usually leave the
family in which they are born when they are in Class la, but
they tend to stay near cow/calf groups and tag along with a few
other young males at the periphery. Joyce found that gradually,
as males get older, they spend more time in all-male groups in
“bull areas” away from the cows and calves. Bulls do not usually
begin to compete for estrous females until they enter Class 3,
and even then they can only hope to sneak matings when the
bigger males are not around or are distracted. The Class 4 and
5 males are more successful at mating. Bulls begin to come into
musth at around 30 years old, and the older males in musth are
the most successful of all.
Among the bulls Joyce detected dominance patterns based
on size and therefore age. Each male appears to know his
relative rank in relation to every other male in the population.
In Amboseli the five oldest bulls are: 1) M13; 2) M22; 3) M126;
4) M45; and 5) M99. If these bulls meet each other at, say, a
fallen tree, M13 will almost always be able to supplant M22 and
Ml26 at the best branch and so on down the line. But if one of

MATING

these bulls comes into musth all that is changed. If M22 is in
musth and meets M13 not in musth, M13 will back down and
avoid a confrontation with him. Musth thus confers greater
dominance status on an individual.
For much of the year the Class 4 and 5 males spend their time
in bull areas. Certain males stay in certain areas and they always
go back to these places when they are not in musth. It is a bit
like an all-male club. The big males wander around with one or
two buddies or on their own feeding, resting, mud wallowing,
and dusting. It is a very peaceful period, during which they are
gaining weight and building up their reserves of energy. When
a bull comes into musth he leaves the bull area and searches for
females. It is almost a Jekyll and Hyde sort of change. Every¬
thing about the bull seems to alter. First the bull’s temporal
glands start to swell, then to secrete, and finally he begins to
dribble urine. At the same time his posture changes. He carries
his head high, tucks his chin in, and moves with a purposeful,
long stride. Joyce can detect a musth male from over half a mile
away across a plain just by his posture. Along with the “musth
walk” are some other postures and behavior. Bulls in musth
wave their ears in a peculiar way, unlike the earflapping of
females or non-musth males. Joyce theorizes that the ear waves
waft the scent of the bull’s temporal secretions before him.
Musth bulls also have a special vocalization never used by
non-musth males or females. It has a low frequency and
probably covers a long distance. Even when the bull is nearby
the sound seems muted and distant to the human ear. Bulls in
musth also do odd things with their trunks, frequently raising
them up to their foreheads in a characteristic posture.
However, the most striking change from non-musth to
musth is in the bull’s conduct. He becomes extremely aggressive
to other bulls and, as we have seen, sometimes to human
observers as well. Joyce had read that testosterone levels rose
markedly in the blood of Asian musth bulls and she was keen to
see if the same thing happened in African bulls. It was
impractical to try to get frequent blood samples from wild
elephants, but it was possible to collect urine from the Amboseli
elephants. Harvey and I had done it in the early part of the
study. Most of the Amboseli soil is fairly hard in the dry season
and when an elephant urinates the liquid does not immediately

1^3

114

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

•

sink in but leaves a puddle for a brief time. Harvey and I were
collecting urine from females and it was easy enough to drive
up to them and gently ask them to move away so we could get
out and obtain a small amount. It was another thing to try to get
urine from a musth bull, but if anyone was going to do it it was
Joyce. In her tiny Suzuki jeep she would race up to a bull after
he urinated and somehow convince him to move off a few
yards; then she would jump out and quickly collect the urine in
a huge syringe.
The urine was transferred to bottles, labeled, and stored in a
freezer. It was then shipped to Bill Lasley and his team at the
San Diego Zoo, where it was analyzed. The findings were
fascinating. Bulls in musth had markedly raised testosterone
levels. Testosterone has been linked to aggression in other
mammals including man, so the behavior of the musth males
was not surprising. Nor was it surprising to find that musth
bulls will seriously fight one another.
Fighting was known to be rare among elephants. Iain had
seen only one fight in his time in Manyara. I did not see a true
fight until 1978. I had witnessed young bulls and even fairly
large males sparring and sometimes getting quite heated in the
process, but a fight is a different thing altogether. When two
bulls spar it is basically a friendly testing of each other’s
strength and these tests form and maintain the relative domi¬
nance positions. In sparring the two males usually move right
up to each other and touch trunks to each other’s mouths and
sometimes to the temporal glands, then they may entwine their
trunks, or put them on each other’s heads. After this gentle
investigation they push their heads together, interlocking their
tusks. In this position they might shove each other back and
forth or back up and rush together. Sparring does not escalate
into a fight.
In true fights the two bulls do not touch with their trunks
first. They approach each other with heads high and ears out
and there is a lot of maneuvering and sidestepping to keep
lined up. They then make swift, short, sharp lunges at each
other, coming together with immense force. Sometimes they
lock tusks and each tries to twist his opponent off his feet. If one
bull falls the other will tusk it through the head or side and kill
it. A fight is a frightening thing, and I still get very upset

MATING

watching one. Joyce has seen scores of fights, and although she
can remain calm enough to take notes and film them with a
video camera, she always finds them distressing, especially
when she thinks that one of the bulls may be killed. On several
occasions she has heard the horrible sound of a tusk cracking
and seen as much as three quarters of a tusk drop to the
ground. Some of the fights have gone on for at least eight
hours. Circumstantial evidence leads us to believe that two bulls
in Amboseli have been killed as a result of fighting in the last
few years.
Watching a bull in musth over the two or three months he is
in that state gives a good indication of why males are not in
musth year-round. The musth strategy seems to be for a bull to
put all his energy into pursuing females for a few months out
of the year. During musth the bull spends most of his time
traveling in his search for females. When he finds a female, he
can spend very little time feeding or resting because he must
chase away other males and guard the female. On some
occasions he may have to fight another musth bull. Joyce took
a series of photographs to assess the condition of musth bulls
and found that the bulls gradually lost weight over the musth
period until at the end they were very thin, and at that point
they went out of musth and returned to their bull area.
Thus, for example, Bad Bull cannot afford to be in musth all
year round. Nor can he come into musth at just any time of the
year. Much depends on when bulls that are dominant to him
come in. Bad Bull comes into musth in June just when M13 is
losing condition and going out of musth. June, July, and
August are not the best months to find estrous females; March,
April, and May are better, but then Bad Bull would have to
compete with M13 and M22, who are both dominant to him.
He would be risking his life and would probably mate with only
a few females that the other two had not found. Later in the
year he is the dominant musth male and has the field to himself.
In the end, musth appears to give a male great advantages in
his relations with other males. Non-musth bulls are capable of
mating but they will always give way to a musth bull in any
dispute. Thus, if a musth male finds an estrous female he will
usually be able to mate with her and then guard her during the
crucial time when she is ovulating. Joyce speculates that the

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

dribbling of urine, the secretion from the temporal glands, and
the characteristic postures, gestures, and vocalizations of the
musth bull constitute a visual, vocal, and olfactory advertising.
A bull in musth is announcing that he is in excellent condition,
is surging with testosterone, and is willing to fight, and fight to
the death, for estrous females or simply for his continued
status. (Elephants are long-lived and what happens in future
years may be more important than a single estrous female.)
Other elephants can see, hear, and smell a musth male before
he even arrives where they are. Depending on an elephant’s
sex, the animal may respond in a variety of ways to the
knowledge that there is a musth bull in the area. For example,
when a musth bull wanders about he leaves a scent trail from
his dribbling. Joyce has found that males and females react
differently to the scent trail. Females will stop and sniff a trail
and will usually show excitement by rumbling and flapping
their ears. The way a male reacts to the trail depends on his own
musth state, who the bull was who made the trail, and their
current dominance relationship. A younger male in musth, on
finding the scent trail of an older, dominant musth male, will
stop, smell the trail, and look around anxiously for the bull that
made it. At the same time he might decrease his own dribbling
and temporal-gland secretion. Usually a dominant male will
simply ignore the scent trail of a younger musth male. When
the males are close in rank, one may track the other in order to
have a confrontation and settle their dominance relationship.
Both my data and Joyce’s on mating behavior indicate that
females prefer mating with musth bulls and that they may
actually exercise some choice in the matter. In a paper I wrote
for the journal Behaviour entitled “Oestrous behaviour and
female choice in the African elephant,” I described estrous
behavior and set out my reasons for believing that females ,had
choice and why they chose as they did.
From my data I showed that a female, if determined, can on
most occasions outrun a male that is pursuing her. Thus she
does not have to mate with every male that chases her. When a
female goes into consort with a male, allowing him to mate and
guard her, in 87 percent of the cases it is with a musth bull. In
the first section of this chapter I described how Tia was able to
outrun her pursuers. She eventually mated with a large male in

MATING

musth, Bad Bull, and went into consort with him. After a
couple of days he lost interest in her, presumably after testing
her urine and determining that the period in which she was
ovulating had passed. By the time he left she had probably
already conceived. This was a typical series of events.
In the Behaviour paper I speculated that there were several
advantages to a female choosing to mate with a large Class 4 or
5 male in musth. There are two immediate short-term advan¬
tages. First, by choosing to mate and consort with a musth male
a female may be able to avoid harassment by other bulls, since
the musth male will be able to chase off and threaten other bulls
who approach her. By staying close to a musth male a female
reduces the stressful consequences of being in estrus. Being
chased by males for three or four days appears to be exhausting,
disrupts family cohesion, reduces the normal time spent feed¬
ing and resting, and could cause injuries to the female or her
youngest calf. Second, with only a few days in which to
conceive, it is important for a female to find a fertile male. It
has been shown in other mammal species that high testosterone
levels can correspond to increased production of sperm. Musth
bulls, with their high testosterone levels, may, therefore, be
more likely to impregnate a female.
There may also be long-term advantages to mating with a
musth male. Only the older males come into musth, that is,
those over 30, and the ones that are most successful and stay in
musth the longest are those over 40. An older male has in a
sense proven that he has “good genes” simply by surviving. In
addition, if longevity is heritable, it would be advantageous for
a female to pass this trait on to her sons and daughters.
Longevity is important for female elephants, since the longer
females live the more calves they can produce and raise
successfully, while longevity may be even more important for
the reproductive success of males, because they do not start to
father calves regularly until they are well over 30.
It might be argued that a female does not really have much
choice in whom she mates with because she almost always has to
mate with the bull who happens to be in musth at the time she
is in estrus. At times there may be more than one bull in musth
around an estrous female, but it would be unlikely that she
could choose between them. The outcome of the interactions

117

118

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

<

between the males would override the potential choice of the
female. However, I think it is worth considering that a female
might come into estrus in response to a particular male being in
musth and in that case she may be exercising choice.
Personally, I cannot imagine why Tia wanted to mate with
Bad Bull, but then she may have seen something in him that I
did not.
The T families did not change in number or composition
during 1978, but given a 22-month gestation period I expected
quite a few new additions in 1980.

Social Relationships
1979

TF eresia and her two calves, Theodora and Tolstoy, and her
grandchildren, Tallulah and Tim, walked south, first through a
strip of Acacia tortilis trees and on through an area of lava rocks
and small bushes. It was early morning, an unusual time for
them to be moving in that direction. In the late afternoon of the
previous day they had left the Longinye swamp with Slit Ear
and her family, had crossed into the Ol Tukai Orok woodlands,
and fed on the palms and Acacia xanthophloea trees for a while
before settling down to sleep in an open area near the southern
tip of the Enkongo Narok swamp.
Slit Ear had woken earlier than Teresia and had turned back
toward Ol Tukai Orok and Longinye in the traditional pattern
of moving out from the swamps at night and back to them in
the daytime. She and her family were nearly a mile away when
Teresia woke and stood up. The rest of her little group got up
as well, stretched and yawned, and dusted and scratched
themselves. Teresia gave a long, low rumble, the contact call
that basically says, “Here I am, where are you?” She held still,

121

122

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

listening, her head high and ears extended, but heard no
answer. She called again, this time making an even lowerfrequency sound that traveled farther. She heard a distant
answer from Slit Ear, and turning her head to locate where Slit
Ear was, Teresia rumbled again and once more got an answer.
However, instead of heading off in the direction Slit Ear had
taken, Teresia turned toward the south. The rest of her family
remained facing north. Teresia swung her right front foot back
and forth in the characteristic elephant gesture of indecision.
She took a few steps forward, picked up some dust, and threw
it on her back, called again, waited and listened. Then she
decisively lifted and spread her ears, flapped them against her
neck and shoulders, let them slide down with a rasping sound,
and strode off toward Kilimanjaro. Her family loyally followed.
The TD family walked south for about a mile and a half
without stopping to feed. Teresia seemed to have a particular
destination in mind. Just before dawn they arrived at a wide
depression more or less at the base of the mountain. This area
consisted of small, thorny trees, Balanites glabra and Acacia
nubica, interspersed with some grasses and low bushes. It was a
favored feeding area for the Amboseli elephants in July and
especially August. These were mid dry-season months when
the more palatable and nutritious grasses in the bushed grass¬
lands were finished but there was still good forage left in some
of the woodlands outside the park. The elephants used the
woodland to the south before finally retreating once again to
the swamps within the park for the late dry-season months of
September and October. While feeding there they had to walk
back to either Longinye or Enkongo Narok swamps to drink,
but they usually did this at night. Teresia, who was in her late
fifties, had been using this area in July and August from the
time she was a young calf. Following the tradition of her family
she had decided to spend a few days in the south.
For three days the TD family fed in the depression, drinking
at night or in the early morning, but they were never completely
relaxed there. There were many Maasai around, and the
elephants had to be alert to their movements and activities. Still
the food was good and nothing unpleasant happened. But the
loss of Trista had reduced the size of the TD family, and they
did not feel as secure as they would have in a larger group with

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

just that many more eyes and ears and trunks on the alert.
Without the eight members of Slit Ear’s family for company
and added protection, they were isolated and vulnerable. On
the morning of the fourth day Teresia led her family north,
toward Amboseli and Slit Ear.
When they crossed the park boundary and found themselves
back in the Ol Tukai Orok woodlands, the younger members of
the family started running and trumpeting. Tallulah, Theo¬
dora, Tim, and Tolstoy let their bodies go loose as they ran,
which made their ears and trunks flop about. At the same time,
they trumpeted with a loud pulsating sound associated with
play. Teresia more or less maintained her dignity but she too
broke into a run. When the younger animals got ahead, Tim
and Tolstoy stopped, whirled around, and came together for a
sparring match. Tallulah and Theodora found some bushes
and began bashing through them and beating them with their
tusks. Their tails were curled up over their backs, their heads
were held high with their noses poked out, and the whites of
their eyes showed as they rolled the pupils up. Teresia caught
up with the others and stood with her head up and out. In her
usually placid brown eye was a decidedly wild glint.
The young animals played for another ten minutes before
everyone began to feed on the regenerating acacias, breaking
off small branches and carefully stripping them of the tasty and
nutritious bark. After a while they switched to the grass that was
growing under and around the trees. It had been a year of
unusually high rainfall and even though it was getting toward
late dry season there was still some grass remaining. They fed
for another 20 minutes and then all stopped at once when they
heard an elephant give a contact call about a mile away. They
listened for a moment but resumed feeding and did not answer
because it was not someone from their bond group.
Soon after, they began walking slowly, feeding as they went,
through the mixed acacia and palm trees, finally arriving at the
northern edge of the woodland at midmorning. Here they
rested, standing in a tight bunch under one of the yellowbarked trees. On reaching this spot Teresia called several times
but got no response. She and her group were eager to rejoin
Slit Ear, but they did not know where she was.
After their rest they crossed the pan and open plain and

123

124

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

reached the northern end of the Longinye swamp. They fed
there for the rest of the day. Teresia continued to call at
intervals, but still got no response. All the members of the
group had fresh temporal-gland secretions almost continu¬
ously. They met several other family groups in Longinye but
ignored them, passing them by or feeding near them without
interacting.
That night they moved out of Longinye to the east into the
Olodo Are woodlands. They spent the night feeding and
resting. Teresia called several times during the night and in the
early hours of the morning when the group woke up. On that
occasion she heard an answer more than a mile away toward the
northwest but she was not sure it was Slit Ear. She started to
move in that direction in any case. They walked west until they
arrived at an area of regenerating acacia trees on the eastern
side of Longinye. Here Teresia stopped and rumbled. She
instantly got a response from about a quarter of a mile away
and to the south. This was definitely Slit Ear, and Tia and Tess
answered as well.
Teresia changed her course and began walking rapidly to the
south. She and the others were streaming from their temporal
glands and the sides of their faces showed thick black lines all
the way to their chins. They walked through the patch of young
acacias and emerged in an area of swamp interspersed with
wooded islands. At a little rise above the swamp, they stopped
and Teresia, Theodora, and Tallulah rumbled, listened, heard
a response, and rumbled a louder sound. They were clearly
excited, with heads held high and ears lifted. They shifted their
course slightly and, almost running, plunged down into the
swamp course and up the other side onto the first island.
Suddenly ahead of them was a group of elephants running
out of the trees and coming straight for them. Teresia stopped
for a moment in alarm, then recognized Slit Ear, and both
groups ran, rumbling, screaming, and trumpeting toward each
other. The younger animals had moved ahead of Teresia, but
when the two groups came together, Slit Ear ignored the others
and pushed through them to reach Teresia and greet her. Both
elephants raised their heads up into the air and clicked their
tusks together, wound their trunks around each other’s while
rumbling loudly, and holding and flapping their ears in the

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

greeting posture. They whirled around and leaned and rubbed
on one another. Meanwhile all the other members were greet¬
ing each other with much spinning, backing, urinating, earflap¬
ping, entwining of trunks, and clicking of tusks. All the
elephants were producing so much temporal-gland secretion
that it dribbled down along their chins and into their mouths.
Above all, the sounds of their greeting rent the air as over and
over again they gave forth rich rumbles and piercing trumpets
of joy.
After 18 years of watching elephants I still feel a tremendous
thrill at witnessing a greeting ceremony. Somehow it epitomizes
what makes elephants so special and interesting. I have no
doubt even in my most scientifically rigorous moments that the
elephants are experiencing joy when they find each other
again. It may not be similar to human joy or even comparable,
but it is elephantine joy and it plays a very important part in
their whole social system.
Compared to most other animals elephants lead remarkably
complex social lives. Even in primate societies, which are
generally considered to be highly intricate, an individual’s
relationships rarely extend beyond the group it is born into or
at most to neighboring groups. For example, in the baboon
social system, the females stay in the group or troop in which
they are born, and within that troop they have very complex
relationships. They may encounter individuals from neighbor¬
ing troops but their interactions are brief. Males leave their
natal troop and transfer to other troops in the area and thereby
increase their social relationships, but over the course of a
lifetime a male baboon would still interact with a restricted and
relatively small number of individuals. Elephants also live in
female-bonded groups in which females stay in their natal
group for their lifetime and males leave at maturity. However,
both male and female elephants’ relationships radiate well
beyond the family group through a multi-tiered network of
relationships encompassing the whole population.
The network of relationships is the fiber that makes up
elephant society. These relationships range from the strongest
bond of all, that of mother and infant, to mere acquaintance¬
ship between animals whose ranges rarely overlap. I find it

125

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

easiest to conceive of the system by thinking of each individual
as being at the center of a series of concentric circles, each circle
getting larger as it gets farther from the individual (see
diagram). If, in 1979, I take Slit Ear as the central individual,
1979

her closest relationship is with her youngest calf, her C’76, who
will usually be within a few yards of her. The next closest
individuals will be her older but still immature calves, Tamar
and Tara. I consider these four animals to be in the first circle.
In the second circle are the other members of her family, Tia
and Tess (who is probably Slit Ear’s older daughter), and Tia’s
offspring, her C’76 and Right Fang. Slit Ear will rarely be more
than 25 yards from these animals. Sometimes there may be a
split within the family but it will usually last only for a few days.
Data collected over the years on association patterns between
the individuals within the family reveal that Slit Ear and her
calves are found together 99 percent of the time and Slit Ear

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

and the other family members are together over 90 percent of
the time.
More conspicuous than the percent of time these animals
spend together, which is an accumulative observation, is the
behavior among the individuals. The TC family usually acts in
a coordinated manner, with everyone feeding, drinking, trav¬
eling, or resting at the same time and taking their cue from Slit
Ear, the matriarch. The close bonds among the individuals are
constantly being reinforced by tactile interactions and vocal
communication. Members of a family are often in physical
contact, rubbing on one another, touching each other with
trunks, leaning against one another when resting, and for the
younger animals, frequently playing. Older female calves spend
a considerable amount of time taking care of the younger
calves, and in this way bonds between different-aged animals
develop early on. Even when they are not in a tight-knit bunch,
Slit Ear’s family maintains contact with gentle rumbling vocal¬
izations, calling back and forth to each other when they are
spread out in thick vegetation.
But the best indicator of the strength of the bonds between
elephants is the greeting ceremony. Almost all elephants will
greet one another but the nature and intensity of the greeting
depends on who the elephants are, what their relationship is,
and if it is a close one, how long they have been separated. If
Slit Ear’s family joins Estella’s while feeding in Longinye some
of the family members might greet with an exchange of
trunks — that is, put the tips of their trunks in each other’s
mouths. Usually a subordinate animal will be the one to initiate
the greeting. It almost always occurs among the younger
members of the two families and there are no accompanying
vocalizations. Slit Ear would not deign to greet anyone in this
manner; nor would Estella for that matter, so they would
basically ignore one another while the other members of their
families quietly greeted each other.
A greeting within the family, however, is a very different
thing. Once in a while Tia will break off from Slit Ear and feed
on her own with her two calves. It may be an accidental
separation or it may be deliberate on Tia’s part. Slit Ear can be
very competitive over food and Tia always gives way to her. But
for whatever reason they separate, which is not often, their

127

128

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

reunions always involve a special ceremony. If they have been
separated for only a short while, say a few hours, then the
greeting will be at low intensity. Tia might join Slit Ear by
walking up to her and lifting her head, raising and flapping her
ears, and rumbling the throaty “greeting rumble.” Depending
on her mood, Slit Ear will usually answer in the same way,
overlapping with Tia’s rumble. They might then reach trunks
toward each other. If Tia has been separated for a few days
then the greeting ceremony will inevitably be far more intense
and carried out with great energy and excitement. The two
subgroups of the family will run together, rumbling, trumpet¬
ing, and screaming, raise their heads, click their tusks together,
entwine their trunks, flap their ears, spin around and back into
each other, urinate and defecate, and generally show great
excitement. A greeting such as this will sometimes last for as
long as ten minutes. I believe that the greeting ceremony
maintains and reinforces the bonds among the family members.
Family members are by definition related to some degree, but
I would be tempted to give my right arm to go back in time in
order to And out exactly how they are related. With some
families I felt fairly confident about working out their family
trees, especially if it was a relatively small family. For example,
in 1979 I drew family trees for the TA, TB, and TD families
that were probably close to being accurate. The TB and TD
families were very simple. Tania was the mother of three male
calves each separated by about four years. Teresia was probably
the mother or grandmother to everyone in her family. The TA
family had only one question. Torn Ear was the mother of her
C’74, Tilly, Teddy, and Tuskless. Tonie was the odd one out. It
appeared that Tonie’s mother died early in the study, but I
wondered how that female was related to Torn Ear. Could she
have been her daughter or sister or what?
The TC family was a little more difficult. Slit Ear could have
been Tia’s mother; she was estimated to have been born in
1936, while Tia was estimated to have been born in 1950. That
would have made Slit Ear 14 years old when Tia was born.
Females can give birth at 14 (the youngest female to give birth
in the Amboseli population was 11) so theoretically Slit Ear
could have been Tia’s mother, but I intuitively doubted it. I
suspected that Tia may have been the daughter of an older

With Torn Ear was a young tuskless female about 11 years old.

harvey croze

The upcurved female with the slit in her right ear was called Slit Ear.

At the rear of the group was a
straight-tusked, ancient but
immensely dignified female
who was named Teresia.

A very “handsome” fe¬
male who became known
as Tania had the young¬
est calf in the group, a
male only a few months
old, who several years
later was named Toby.
HARVEY CROZE

A large female with V- shaped notch out of her
right ear became known as Torn Ear. harvey croze

Teresia had a daughter about 11 years old who was
given the name Tina.

A “pretty” young adult female who was eventu¬
ally called Tia had a funny little calf with her
who had one left tusk and a tiny stunted right
tusk, and he was immediately named Right Fang.
HARVEY CROZE

Members of the T bond group meet in Longinye and perform an
intense greeting ceremony, harvey croze

M13 stops and tests the
female’s urine by touching and
smelling it with his trunk, and
then placing his trunk in his
mouth to assay the hormone
levels.

Finding the results of in¬
terest, he sets off in pur¬
suit of her.

fTflfc 1
k

mm

x .

Joyce following the musth male Iain, who is the big¬
gest bull in the population

Gentle greeting/sparring

A young female from one family greets a small calf from another
family.

Two male calves playing:
The favorite game of
calves is to climb on a
sleeping animal.
;

He gets up and turns to
meet the challenge of the
other.

«

Estella and her twin calves, Eclipse and Equinox, who were born in
June 1980

An older sister gets a sleeping calf
up onto its feet when it is time for
the family to move on.

An elephant near death
who was speared and be¬
came ill with septicemia

An elephant who was
speared by the Maasai;
she carried the spear in
her head for over a year
before it finally fell out
and she is now fine.

A young female
speared by Maasai
warriors proving
their bravery; rang¬
ers have opened up
the carcass so that
lions can more easily
feed on it.

Vultures descend on a dead elephant.

Agatha of the AAs stops and feels and gently moves her mother
Annabelle’s skull, even though it is several years after Annabelle’s
death and Agatha passes the spot frequently.

Elephants will inevitably inspect the carcass or skeleton of a dead
elephant they have not come across before: Here the members of a
family touch and stroke and move the bones of an elephant that
died in the park; the female on the right tosses a bone in the air.

Teresia at 58

Teresia at 51 years old and
Tolstoy at 2 years old
HARVEY CROZE

Tolstoy at 15

Slit Ear at 37 and
Tara at 6

Slit Ear at 50

Tara at 19

(with a recently broken tusk)
and her C’83

Tess at 23

Right Fang at 3

Teddy at 7

Right Fang at 17

harvey croze

Teddy at 21

Author and first research vehicle in 1975

Author and Land-Rover in 1987

marion kaplan

joyce poole

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

female in the family who died, possibly the previous matriarch
less, who was born in 1963, was probably Slit Ear’s daughter,
but I had no positive evidence except that she stayed close to
Sht Ear and the gap between her age and Slit Ear’s next
youngest calf was four years, the average calving interval. Tara,
who was born in 1967, was following Slit Ear and they were
acting in the typical mother-calf way when I first met them in
1973, and so it was highly likely that she was Slit Ear’s daughter.
Because Tamar, born in 1971, was still suckling from Slit Ear in
1973, there was little doubt that she was Slit Ear’s calf. With Slit
Ears youngest calf, her C’76, there was no doubt. Once the
study began, the maturity of any calf that was born was
positively known. Tia’s offspring presented no problem. Right
Fang was still suckling in 1973 and the birth of Tia’s C’76 was
recorded on the very day he was born.
To complicate my efforts to sort out kin relationships within
the family, there was the question of paternity. With an
average birth interval of four to five years, and given both the
attrition rate of large adult males and the musth phenomenon,
in which an individual male is only sexually active for a few
months of each year, the chances of subsequent calves of one
female having the same father are probably not high. Thus
Slit Ear’s daughters were probably half sisters. On the other
hand, because of musth, the chances of calves born within a
few months of each other in one family having the same father
(but different mothers) are fairly good. In the previous
chaptei I mentioned that Slit Ear was in estrus only a few days
before Tia and that she too had been in consort with Bad Bull.
My data show that there tends to be a synchrony of estrus
within families — that is, the females who are available (those
who are neither pregnant nor suckling calves under two years
old) often come into estrus within a few weeks of one another.
If there is one dominant bull in musth at the time when a
family’s females are coming into estrus then that bull will
probably father all the calves conceived in that period. The
calves will then be half brothers or half sisters on their father’s
side, and half brothers or half sisters to their siblings on their
mother s side, and grandchildren, nieces, nephews, aunts,
uncles, or cousins to some of the same and other members of

129

130

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

the family. In fact, the relationships are probably more than a
little convoluted.
Thus the animals in the first two inner circles of the diagram
will be closely related under any circumstances, which is an
important consideration in understanding behavior between
individuals. In the third circle from the center are the members
of Slit Ear’s bond group. Closest to her are the TDs, Teresia’s
family, and then the TAs and TBs, led by Tuskless and Tania.
All four of these families form close bonds, exhibited by the
amount of time they spend together and their behavior both on
meeting and when they are together. The association data show
that Slit Ear’s family, the TCs, are found with the TDs over 80
percent of the time. That is a very high level, indeed, one of the
highest of any of the bond groups in the population. Evidence
of the strength of the bonds between these two families is
substantiated by the intensity of the greeting ceremonies they
perform when they come together after a separation. In the
first part of this chapter I described a greeting between the TCs
and TDs. These two families are particularly close and it
appears the main tie that binds them is the very strong
attachment between Slit Ear and Teresia. By their ages, they
could be mother and daughter but I have always suspected it is
another relationship. Whatever it is I am sure it goes back the
full 40-plus years of Slit Ear’s life.
Slit Ear is not as closely bonded to the TAs and TBs. From a
few greetings I saw in the early days of the study I believe that
Slit Ear had a fairly close relationship with Torn Ear. After
Torn Ear died in 1976, however, the attraction between the
families appeared to weaken and they began to spend less time
together. The TCs spend 34 percent of their time with the TAs
and 35 percent of their time with the TBs. This is still much
higher than their association with any other family in the
population. The next closest family is the DB family, at only 15
percent. All the other families in the population are found with
the TCs at even lower levels of association.
The relationships among the families and between the indi¬
viduals within a bond group intrigue me. I believe the animals
are related but at what level I do not know. My birth records go
back only to 1970 so it is impossible for me to know how, or
even if, the adult females are related to one another. With

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

regard to the present adult females, it is a question that can
never be answered, but I should get some insights in the years
to come as I watch what happens to the structure of the families
and bond groups in which I do know the relationships.
One event has already helped my understanding of how
bond groups are formed. In the first years of the study the
biggest family unit in the population was the PAs, led by the
matriarch Penelope. There were several other large females in
the family as well: Phoebe, Patricia, Philomena, Priscilla, and
Zoya (definitely a P member, but originally given a “Z” name
because she was hrst found in a small subgroup that I mistak¬
enly thought was a new family unit). The PA family grew to 29
members, which was very large, considering that the average
family unit was only nine. The family broke into subgroups
rom time to time but there did not seem to be a definite
pattern to the separations until 1978-79. More and more often
the family split into two groups, one section led by Penelope
and the other by Phoebe. Previously the family had not seemed
to be able to decide who was going to line up behind Penelope
and who behind Phoebe. In the following two years they
appeared to work it out, with 16 animals forming Penelope’s
group and 13 forming Phoebe’s group. By 1982 I considered
them two separate family units, the PAs and the PCs. Never¬
theless, they still spent more time with each other than with any
other families in the population; when they met they performed
the greeting ceremony, and when they were together they
moved in a coordinated way and showed affiliative behavior
toward each other’s members. In other words, these two
families formed a bond group.
I suspect that the division of the PA family is typical of the
way bond groups originate. Family units simply get too large to
be efficient social groupings, and either they split more or less
down the middle or a subgroup breaks off. In Lake Manyara
Iain watched the gradual breaking off of a small subgroup of
five animals from a large family of 22. The splinter group
consisted of an adult female, her young adult daughter, and
their three calves. The leader of the subgroup was relatively
young compared to some of the other females in the family.
Iain suggested that competition from these older females in a
large family led the younger female to leave so she could forage

131

132

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

on her own with only her closest relatives. But as in Amboseli,
her newly formed family maintained close bonds with the
original family and often rejoined them or moved in the same
area as they did.
The fourth circle out from Slit Ear includes the members of
the families that make up her clan. Now I have to admit that I
am not sure the concept of “clan” means anything at all to Slit
Ear. As I explained in Chapter III, during the dry season
particular families tend to go back to particular areas of the
Amboseli basin. The four T families spend the dry season
concentrating on the Longinye swamp and the Ol Tukai Orok
woodlands in the daytime, and the lava scrub to the south and
the Olodo Are area to the east at night. They are very rarely
seen using the Enkongo Narok swamp and the area west of that
swamp. There are five other family units that more or less
follow the same pattern: the DAs, DBs, EAs, EBs, and SAs. I
consider that these nine families make up one clan. They share
the same range amicably and sometimes even move together in
aggregations, but they reveal no close bonds with one another.
I have never seen a T animal approach any of the individuals
from the other families and perform the greeting ceremony.
I have, however, seen aggressive interactions between clan
members. One animal will approach an individual or group
from another family with ears folded horizontally in a charac¬
teristic posture of aggression, and the individual or group will
either move away, stand its ground, or respond aggressively in
turn. It can happen when one animal wants something the
other is feeding on, or wants the shade of a tree the others are
standing under, or it may happen for no reason apparent to a
human observer. Aggression also occurs within families and
bond groups. In fact, aggressive interactions occur most fre¬
quently within families, which is not surprising because the
members are together most of the time. There is a drop in
aggression within bond groups and clans, and an increase again
between individuals from different clans. Slit Ear is often
aggressive to other elephants, and some of my colleagues say
she is a “real bitch.” She is, but I like her spirit.
In the fifth circle out from Slit Ear is her subpopulation. In
Chapter III, I described the division of the population into
central and peripheral subpopulations, with the central ele-

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

phants concentrating on the basin swamps in the dry season
and the peripheral elephants ranging in the bushland sur¬
rounding the basin and using the swamps only for drinking and
for some periods of feeding. Slit Ear and the other Ts are
members of the central subpopulation.
Slit Ear’s subpopulation consists of 32 families; 26 of these
families overlap with her in and around the Longinye swamp in
the dry season and she will meet them from time to time. The
other five families spend more time in the region of the
Enkongo Narok swamp and so she will probably not meet them
in the dry season more than a few times. Her relationships and
interactions with the other members of the subpopulation
depend on whether they are family members, bond-group
members, clan members, overlapping clans, or more distant
clans. She will know all the other elephants in the subpopula¬
tion and she will know her relative dominance position to them.
On the whole her interactions with her family and bond group
will be amicable, although she will compete with the other
individuals and might even give someone a poke in the backside
for not getting out of her way fast enough. Her interactions
with the rest of the subpopulation will be few and far between
in the dry season, but she may interact aggressively with those
animals she does meet.
Slit Ear’s final circle of relationships consists of the whole
population, including the peripheral subpopulation and the
adult independent bulls. Many of the animals in these two
categories she will not meet at all during the dry season. The
peripheral subpopulation, consisting of 15 families, spends
the dry season west of Enkongo Narok and south toward the
mountain. Slit Ear’s home range does not overlap with theirs
except possibly in some of the night feeding areas to the south.
Generally, it is only when the rains begin and the system of
dry-season home ranges breaks down that the two subpopula¬
tions meet. Then the family units join together in large
aggregations and move throughout the whole basin and sur¬
rounding areas.
When the family units from the different clans and subpop¬
ulations meet and merge, there always appears to me to be a
heightened social awareness with a great increase in interac¬
tions. Male calves in particular seek out the young males from

133

134

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

families they do not know well and spar and test each other’s
strength. The adult females, too, test their dominance relations
with other females, threatening or sometimes even chasing
another female, to reestablish old, or determine new, relation¬
ships. Slit Ear is one of the highest-ranking females in the whole
population and she does not miss many opportunities to make
sure everyone acknowledges this. At the same time there are
many amicable and playful interactions between members of
different families. Elephants seem to be attracted to other
elephants, and when the ecological conditions allow it they
appear to prefer to be in these large, socially stimulating
groups.
Clans and subpopulations may only be a figment of my
imagination in that I may have superimposed a structure on a
simple geographical separation of families. On the other hand,
the animals may perceive themselves as belonging to a partic¬
ular dry-season home range, which they are willing to defend
from intrusion by other families. It will take years of data
collection to find out whether there is exclusion of some
families from other families’ home ranges, but I strongly
suspect there is. My colleagues and I have seen incidents where
a group from one area has come into another group’s home
range and has experienced aggression from the residents. If
one area is better than another, and there is evidence to suggest
this, then it might be reasonable to speculate that the residents
would try to defend that resource. This is one of the questions
that makes me want to keep the study going for many more
years. From a theoretical point of view, in the held of behavioral
ecology, the question of the defense of resources by kin and
non-kin and the forming of coalitions in that defense is an
important one, but it is equally important for the management
of elephants in conservation areas. It is essential to know what
might happen to an elephant population if part of its range is
cut out and some of the population has to immigrate into new
areas, or if some of its members are culled and certain areas are
left without residents.
Finally, but not inconsequentially, are Slit Ear’s relationships
with the 150 adult males in the population. Her attitude toward
them depends on several factors: the age of the male, his kin
relationship to her, her own sexual status, and — if he is an

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

older male — whether or not he is in musth. In the dry season
Slit Ear will generally encounter males on a daily basis. Young
males, ranging in age from 10 to 20, may join her family for
feeding or traveling and she may or may not tolerate their
presence. My impression is that Slit Ear is fairly intolerant of
young bulls. Other families seem more welcoming and a few of
the families always seem to have a little gaggle of males
following along behind. Except when they irritate her in some
way, young males are almost totally ignored by Slit Ear and it
could be said that she has almost no relationship with them.
Older males of approximately 20 to 30 years are more
problematical. By their early twenties most males will have
become larger than Slit Ear and therefore dominant to her. By
mere bluff and past experience she may still be able to see off
a 20- to 22-year-old but eventually she will give in and accept his
new status. However, these transitional males do not go around
fighting with females — it is not in their interest. More com¬
monly there will be a showdown in which the male and female
will stand with their heads high and their ears spread and try to
make the other back down. In these confrontations with
females, the males are probably feeling their way into their new
status as socially mature bulls. In general, though, males 20 to
30 years old have already started spending more of their time
in the company of other males in the bull areas. During the dry
season they will be separated from the females for much of the
time, and Slit Ear will meet these bulls only when their feeding
ranges overlap or if the bull comes into the cow-calf areas
searching for estrous females. If Slit Ear was in estrus she
would try to avoid a male of this age while waiting for an older
male to come along.
Bulls over 30 have entered a whole new realm, that of the
musth male, and there is no question whatsoever of their status.
Slit Ear would never try to challenge any of these older bulls.
More likely she will greet a large male when he comes into the
group. If he is in musth she will probably show some interest
and excitement and she and her family might respond to his
arrival with a chorus of rumbles. Again I would give an arm or
a leg to know what Slit Ear’s relations are with the large males
in the population. She is older than most of them (due to
poaching and hunting of males for their far bigger tusks, there

135

136

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

are many fewer males over 40 than females; only two or three
males are over 50 while there are several females well into their
hfties and a few may even be in their sixties), but some could be
younger brothers, nephews, or cousins. Does she treat these
individuals any differently from non-relatives? Would she mate
with a brother, and what may be more interesting, since she
does not have much choice with a musth male, would he mate
with her?
i
In the wet season Slit Ear will contact and interact with males
more frequently than in the dry season. Males of all ages are
found in the aggregations that form when abundant vegetation
is available. Typically adult males will make up about 10
percent of an aggregation. Thus if there is a group of 300
elephants, there will be around 30 adult males. If there is a
female in estrus the proportions are likely to be different. I
once found a group of 200 elephants that included 63 adult
males. There were two females in estrus, one of whom was
young and inexperienced, and it was utter chaos.
For long stretches of time Slit Ear basically will be uninter¬
ested in males. When she comes into estrus it is another matter.
Then she tries to attract them and keep them interested in her.
Being an older, very experienced female she will not tolerate
younger males mating with her and will avoid them until she
hnds a musth male to go into consort with. Since I have known
Slit Ear, she has had several calves three to hve years apart in
age. (An average calving interval of four years means that a
female conceives, gives birth after a 22-month gestation period,
followed by about a two-year period of not ovulating, and then
is ready to conceive again.) Slit Ear was probably in estrus only
one time for each of the conceptions I recorded, which means
that, on average, once every four years, for a few days, she
found males of considerable interest. Aside from her own
estrous periods, Slit Ear will show some interest in males when
her daughters and other close family members come into
estrus. Then she will join in the demonstrations and commotion
that occur when a female is pursued and mated. But again this
will not be a common occurrence in the course of a year. In
general, a female’s interactions with the adult males in a
population will be perfunctory and of major importance only
once every four years or so.

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

Thus, in summary, Slit Ear’s relationships radiate out
through the six social circles, from intimate strong bonds with
close kin to mere acquaintanceship with peripheral elephants
and most of the males most of the time.
During 1979 I had many opportunities to see the social
relationships at work. It was a year of high rainfall and lush,
abundant vegetation and the elephants were often in large
aggregations where many interactions occurred. I saw the four
T families between 30 and 40 times each during 1979. They
were not around as often as some families but my sightings of
them were frequent enough for me to keep up with what they
were doing. The realignment of bonds seemed to have solidi¬
fied. Slit Ear and Teresia’s families were almost always together,
and Tania and Tuskless’s were nearly inseparable. Tuskless
had definitely taken over the role of matriarch for her small
family. I was very pleased to see that during this time of
abundance Tania and Tuskless had at least temporarily aban¬
doned the garbage pits and become “real” elephants again,
moving away from the central part of the park and traveling
with the large groups.
It was generally a good time for all the elephants, although
the Ts suffered a loss early in 1979 or late in 1978. Sometime
toward the end of 1978 Tania’s older son, Taabu, disappeared.
At first I thought he might have gone independent. He was
nine years old at the time, which would have been young for
striking out on his own but not unheard of. But by March 1979,
when I had not seen him with either his family or other families
or bulls or on his own, I had to conclude that he was dead.
There was very little poaching or spearing at the time, but
young males around his age are vulnerable. Taabu was a
particularly cheeky young male, frequently getting into mis¬
chief around the lodges and campsites (he once picked up a
small tent of Joyce’s and carried it away, waving it about in his
trunk, with me shouting and chasing him until he dropped it),
and perhaps he got too sure of himself around some Maasai
who did not appreciate his antics. On the other hand he may
have eaten something in the garbage pit that killed him, but I
never found his carcass.
I was away in England and the United States for six weeks in
May and June 1979. I was always very reluctant to leave the

138

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

elephants, knowing I would be missing important events, but
this time I had another colleague on the project. Keith Lindsay,
a young Canadian ecologist, had come to work on the feeding
behavior and habitat use of the elephants in 1978, and it was
reassuring to know that he was there in Amboseli keeping track
of the elephants. Although Keith did not have to know all the
individuals for his ecological work, by the time I left he knew
most of the adult females and many of the independent males.
Keith’s study was an integral part of the overall research
project on the Amboseli elephants. From the beginning of the
study, Jonah, Harvey, and I had wanted to find someone to
work on the ecological aspects of elephant biology, in particular
on how the elephants used the Amboseli habitats and how they
interacted with those habitats. Next to cattle, elephants were the
single most important herbivore in the ecosystem and poten¬
tially they could cause signihcant changes in the vegetation by
their feeding activities. We needed someone to look at these
activities.
It was not until 1978 that we found someone suitable. Joyce
was back in the States for most of 1978 and all of 1979
finishing up her undergraduate degree and starting her Ph.D.
program. I was sharing my camp with Phyllis Lee, a Cam¬
bridge Ph.D. student who was working on the social develop¬
ment of infant vervet monkeys. Phyllis was a smart and lively
Californian whose company I enjoyed tremendously. This
arrangement worked out well, but I was still keen to have a
second person on the elephant project. Thus I was very
pleased to have Keith join me.
Keith had done some research on bears in Canada and then
grew restless and came to Africa on an overland trip. When he
reached Kenya he looked up various ecologists he had heard
about, one of them being Harvey. Harvey put Keith in touch
with me and I in turn put Keith in touch with Jonah and we all
came to an arrangement whereby Keith worked for Jonah
part-time on the ecological monitoring of the park and for the
rest of the time on his own study of the elephants. Keith
registered for a master’s degree at the University of British
Columbia and was sponsored through Jonah by the New York
Zoological Society and through his own grant from the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. He

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

stayed in Jonah’s field house, about three miles from my camp.
As with Joyce’s, Keith’s arrival marked the beginning of a
long and fruitful collaboration on the Amboseli elephants.
From the beginning Keith was an enthusiastic, hardworking,
and very dedicated researcher. In addition, and somewhat
unusually, Keith looked well beyond the science to the greater
context in which the elephants had to live — to conservation in
general and the problems involved in trying to integrate the
needs of people with the needs of wildlife. This concern of
Keith’s and his ability to articulate it well made him an
extremely valuable member of the project.
When I got back from my trip in June I was fascinated to
hear from Keith how everyone was. Studying elephants is a bit
like watching a soap opera. I wanted to know what was
happening, who had had babies, who had been in estrus or
musth and, always with a holding of my breath, who had died.
Keith had mostly good news for me. Many new babies had been
born, some to females I had seen in estrus, which confirmed
that the behavior I had been recording was reproductive
behavior. Keith also had some sad news for me. Alyce had been
speared in May, apparently when the AAs were out of the park.
Her young calf, who had been born in April, died with her, and
Amy’s new calf, born in May, disappeared at the same time. In
the week before I returned Tuskless’s C’76 disappeared. This
was difficult to understand, for the calf was a healthy threeyear-old and it was a very good year in terms of food. I
suspected that her death was garbage-related. By 1979 the TAs
and TBs, except for brief periods at the height of the wet
season, were very serious users of the garbage pits and they also
raided the campers persistently and thoroughly. Perhaps Tusk¬
less’s calf ate something poisonous or a sharp piece of glass or
large plastic bag (the latter two items have been found in
elephant dung near the lodge). I was disturbed by this because
I hated seeing these two families so addicted to human foods.
The situation was becoming acute, particularly in the campsite
where two or three camps were being raided day and night. I
thought the park authorities might feel that they had to shoot
some of the Ts.
Nineteen seventy-nine seemed to be a year of deaths indirectly
related to human activities. The week I got back to Amboseli I

139

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

began to smell something dead near the camp. The smell got
stronger and stronger and it had a particular characteristic that
made me think it was a dead elephant. I drove out in my LandRover to the public campsite area nearby and searched through
all the glades among the palms and acacias. Finally I broke
through into a hidden glade and found a gruesome sight. The
headless decomposing carcass of a young female elephant sat in
an abandoned garbage pit. Somehow the head had been severed
and carried away about 20 feet, almost certainly by lions or
hyenas. From the evidence it looked as if the elephant had fallen
in the pit and then could not get out. She may have broken a limb
or injured her spine in the fall. There were indications that other
elephants had tried to help her. They must have given up even¬
tually, whereupon the lions or hyenas came in and I imagine
attacked her while she was still alive, killing her and feeding on
her head, which was above the lip of the pit. The tusks were still
intact so I knew it had not been poachers. I notified the park
rangers and they came with a tractor, covered over the carcass,
filled in the pit, and collected the tusks.
The ears of the elephant had been eaten so I could not tell
immediately who it was. Finally, through censusing the families
and seeing who was missing and by comparing the tusks to
those in photographs, I discovered that it was Pamela of the PA
family, Philomena’s 17-year-old daughter. Poor Pamela. It was
an unnecessary and cruel death and I felt angry that it had been
caused by human negligence. But, I told myself, there were
bound to be some adverse effects of tourism and its related
human activities in the park, and, everything considered,
Amboseli’s wildlife was little affected by the presence of lodges,
camps, vehicles, and roads. That year just seemed to bring a
spate of incidents: the growing problems with Tuskless and
Tania’s families, the disappearances of Taabu and Tuskless’s
C’76, and the horrible death of Pamela.
Otherwise I came back to a very good period in Amboseli. It
was the third year of exceptional rains and the park was looking
green and vibrant with vegetation. In the camp the grass was
over three feet high and yellow-flowered bushes and purpleflowered shrubs had grown up that I had never seen before. The
elephants were fat and healthy and many new babies were being
born after almost two years of no births. It was such a joy to go

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

out each day in anticipation of what I would find: Would it be a
glorious aggregation of over 500 elephants moving across the
plain, or a young female whom I had known since she was a
young calf coming into estrus for the first time, or a tiny new calf
barely able to walk?
Back in 1978, I had already begun to check the breast
development of all the females who were old enough to
conceive. Elephants have two breasts located between and just
behind their front legs. In shape and position they are very
similar to human breasts. Males and little females just have
small nipples on a flat surface. Lactating females have large,
swollen breasts with prominent nipples. By noting the size and
fullness of a female’s breasts each time I saw her and comparing
them to a lactating female’s, I discovered that females gradually
develop enlarged breasts as their pregnancy progresses. This
turned out to be useful in determining pregnancy in some of
the females. It was a good indicator for those females who had
never had calves before or for those females who had lost calves
or whose older calves were no longer suckling. Females such as
Slit Ear and Tia, who were still suckling their ’76 calves, had
huge, swollen breasts so it was impossible to use the size and
fullness of their breasts as pregnancy indicators. I thought they
were probably pregnant because I had seen them both in estrus
in 1978, but there were no physical signs. Usually females over
20 years old do not appear to bulge or get fatter when they are
pregnant. Younger females sometimes look noticeably fatter
and rounder toward the end of the pregnancy.
On February 26,1979,1 checked the breast sizes of the females
in the TC and TD families. I noted that Slit Ear’s and Tia’s were
“full” and that Tallulah’s breasts had begun to enlarge and were
already bigger than Tess’s. I suspected that Tess had been preg¬
nant once before and miscarried. She had small, slightly devel¬
oped breasts, about one eighth of the size of a lactating female’s
breasts, but with no fullness. On the other hand Tallulah’s
breasts were about one-quarter size and starting to fill out.
In July 1979 I noted further changes in some of the T
females. Tallulah’s breasts were now one-half size with definite
fullness. Tania suddenly seemed to have large, full breasts. On
July 1, I noted: “Tania has three-quarter sized, full breasts —
very distinct change.”

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

In August Tuskless and her gang were being particularly bad
about raiding the campers and on August 12 the rangers had to
come over and shoot above their heads. I did not see Tania
again for about ten days and thought she had been frightened
by the shooting, but then on August 23 she appeared in the
camp with a large, healthy newborn male calf. He was the
center of a great deal of interest in the family. Tilly and Tonie
fussed over him, reaching their trunks to him and touching and
fondling him. He appeared to be enjoying the attention greatly.
Phyllis, my camp-mate, was enchanted with this baby, whom
she named Tom, and fascinated by all the behavior that revolved
around him. It was about then that I sowed a seed in her mind.
I wanted her to come back to Amboseli to study calf development
in elephants when she had finished her thesis. I also plotted a
little in another direction by encouraging a burgeoning romance
between Phyllis and Keith. I wanted Keith to come back after he
finished his master’s thesis, and thought how nice it would be for
them to do their studies together.
The rest of 1979 was fairly uneventful for the Ts. They
continued to enjoy very good conditions. There was no poach¬
ing and few incidents with Maasai. As I look back now, I wish
every year could be as good as this one was for them. One lovely
late afternoon with the sun slanting through the palms, I found
the Ts near my camp. In fact I drove out because I heard the
sounds of elephants playing, in particular the nasal, pulsating
play trumpet that they make with their heads down while
running, charging, or beating through bushes. I found Theo¬
dora, Tara, and Tamar playing among the palms with several
young males, including one of my favorites, Conrad, who had
recently left the CB family. Their play was very active, with the
young females chasing and sparring with the young males, all
with a great deal of noise. I took some notes but mainly just sat
there enjoying them. I wrote:
1730 Theo and Tara still being very silly, chasing males.
Theo comes running out of the palms almost straight into
me. She demonstrates, lifting her head, spreading her ears,
making brief dancing lunges at me. Then she finds a log and
attacks that, first with her front then with her hind feet,
kicking it and breaking it up by stepping on it. She charges

SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS

me flat out, trumpets, circles around, backs up, runs off. I
start the engine to reposition the car and she comes tearing
back and gives an impressive charge with lots of noise. She’s
wonderful.
Theo, Tara, and Tamar played for well over an hour,
expending a tremendous amount of energy. Tallulah, who was
usually one of the most playful and sprightly of the young
females, did not participate. On December 12 I noted, aside
from her full breasts, that she actually looked pregnant. She
was fat and there was a definite bulge. She also seemed to be
moving more slowly. I felt quite excited about her pregnancy.
She was one of the females I had known since she was an
adolescent and it was oddly fulfilling and rewarding watching
her become an adult female.
At the end of 1979 there were 20 animals in the four T
families:
ta

Tuskless (62)
Teddy (66)
Tonie (67)
Tilly (70)

9
6
9
9

tb

Tania (44)
C’79 — Tom
Toby (73)

<J

Slit Ear (36)
C’76
Tamar (71)
Tara (67)
Tess (63)

9
9
9
9
9

Tia (50)
C’76
Right Fang (70)

9
6
6

Teresia (22)
Tolstoy (71)
Theodora (67)
Tallulah (63)
Tim (69)

9
6
9
9
6

tc

td

9
6

143

Qmpfeer VI

Births and Babies
1980

/

t

Tallulah lay down to sleep with the other members of her
family in the early hours of the morning of March 30, 1980.
She had difficulty lying down and once she was down she could
not rest comfortably. After a short time she got up with great
effort, first rolling onto her stomach and then rising on her
knees and finally onto her feet. She stood with her head hung
low, her trunk tip resting on the ground. She dozed but did not
sleep as soundly as the others.
Half an hour later Tallulah abruptly lifted her head, flapped
her ears, and rumbled. Teresia stirred but did not get up.
Tallulah kicked her foot in the dirt and after loosening the soil
she dusted herself. She walked about ten yards from the group
and fed halfheartedly on the grass at the edge of the open area
where the group was sleeping. After about five minutes she
resumed dusting. Then she walked back to the others, who
were still lying in great heaps on the ground, and tried resting
in a standing position. This nap lasted only about 20 minutes
before Tallulah swung her foot, scratched her eyes and her

147

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

ears, and picked up the fine soil and threw it over her back. Her
family continued to sleep, some of them so heavily that they
snored.
Tallulah was restless for the remainder of the sleeping
period, which lasted until around 5:00 a.m. Just as the sky was
beginning to lighten, her family, together with Slit Ear’s, stirred
and one by one got onto their feet. They stretched, yawned,
scratched their eyes and ears with the curve of the trunk just
above the tip, and, almost as if on signal, all urinated and
defecated with loud sounds of whooshing and plopping.
Tallulah was already fully awake and feeding about 15 yards
away. She came over and greeted them with a gentle rumble.
Her behavior was not in synchrony with theirs, and some of
them reached their trunks out to smell her. She turned and
backed into the group in a gesture of submission and nonag¬
gression. Theodora rubbed her head against Tallulah’s back¬
side and Teresia placed her trunk on Tallulah’s vulva and gave
one sharp shake of her head. Tallulah rumbled again and
Theodora and Teresia answered.
After some more dusting and scratching and greetings and
friendly rubbings on one another, the group moved north
toward the southern end of the Enkongo Narok swamp. They
stopped and fed for varying lengths of time, gradually working
their way to the swamp. Tallulah plucked up a few bunches of
grass from time to time, but did not feed in earnest. Every once
in a while she suddenly held still for several seconds. At one
point she shook her head and walked backward a few steps. She
then stopped, swinging one leg back and forth.
By 8:00 the two families had passed along the southeastern
edge of Enkongo Narok, heading toward the Ol Tukai Orok
woodland. They were crossing through an area of tall Sporobolus consimilis grass and briefly halted to feed on the new shoots
of this tough, coarse grass. By now Tallulah was not eating at all
and was definitely behaving unusually. She kept hesitating and
backing up and generally acting agitated and disturbed. The
other elephants appeared to be ignoring her.
At 8:20 Slit Ear made the “let’s go” rumble and set off across
the open pan toward the woodland. All the others followed. As
they neared the edge of the woodland Tallulah suddenly
dropped down on her back knees. Just under her tail a slight

BIRTHS AND BABIES

bulge appeared. Her vulva hung down lower than usual and
liquid was dribbling from it. She got up and walked into a thick
clump of mixed acacia and palm trees. There she lay down on
her side for about five minutes. When she stood up, the bulge
that had first appeared below her tail was much bigger and had
moved down about a foot. In the next few minutes Tallulah was
very restless, moving in and out of the clump of trees and
backing and turning around. The bulge slipped down farther.
Suddenly, at 8:44, with no apparent extra effort on her part,
Tallulah gave birth. The baby elephant, completely enveloped
in a fetal sac, was expelled and on the ground in a matter of
seconds. Tallulah remained quiet for about 45 seconds and
then turned around to the sac and gently touched it with her
foot. Inside the calf kicked its legs and then was quiet. The
other members of her family were about 20 yards away feeding.
Tallulah scraped the grass and earth around the sac with her
front foot in an apparent effort to clear the ground. She
reached down and tried to free the baby from the sac by using
her tusks. The calf began kicking again and Tallulah scraped
the ground more frantically.
At 8:47, three minutes after the birth, some of the younger T
females — Tara, Tess, Theodora, and Tamar — came over
with heads up, rumbling and threatening the small vehicle
which was nearby. The females crowded around the mother
and infant, vocalizing loudly, and joined in helping to remove
the sac. Just then a young independent male, Ml70, pushed his
way in to Tallulah. This upset Tallulah and she threatened
everyone, chasing the young females away. The females in turn
attempted to chase away M170, but he would not be intimi¬
dated. A second, larger male, M12, entered the clump. By now
Tallulah and the other females were very agitated and had
streaming temporal glands.
At 8:54 Slit Ear arrived, threatening everyone. Some of the
others rumbled and urinated at her approach. She turned and
backed into the clump. Tallulah was trying to lift the baby,
which was now free of the sac, with the aid of her foot and
trunk. Finally, at 8:56, 12 minutes after it was born, she got it
to its feet, but it was unable to stay up. Two minutes later it
stood again, but fell down. In the meantime the males, stimu¬
lated by the unusual smells and behavior, kept poking and

150

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

shoving Tallulah and laying their trunks and tusks along her
back as if they were about to mount. She ignored them as much
as possible, holding her ground and not letting them push her
away from the calf. Tallulah, however, seemed to be confused
about what to do with the baby, and kept digging at the ground,
pulling up and trampling vegetation, breaking branches and
backing and turning.
Around 9:10 several more females joined the group around
the newborn calf. These females were from the VA family,
which was not bonded to the Ts. Some of the larger ones
threatened the young T females, causing a great commotion.
There was much aggressive posturing back and forth between
the families. In their excitement two young females got down
on their back knees and raised their heads in the air. All of
them crowded around Tallulah and the baby, and one of them
found the fetal sac, picked it up, put it in her mouth, tossed it
around, and finally threw it over her head.
After ten minutes of intense activity the VAs and most of the
T females had gone, leaving Tallulah and the baby with Tara.
At 9:21, 37 minutes after birth, the calf was finally more or less
able to stand. It searched for its mother’s teats but ended up
trying to suckle from Tara and fell down again. It got up and
fell down several more times, but finally at 9:43, 59 minutes
after the birth, the calf was able to walk. Tallulah, the very
wobbly baby, and Tara came out of the clump of trees. The
baby had difficulty negotiating a root but Tallulah helped it
over. Just then Right Fang arrived and took it upon himself to
defend Tallulah and the calf from the small vehicle that was still
there. Out in the open the calf appeared to gain strength and
although it had to stand with its legs spread wide in order to
keep its balance, it was now able to take a few steps without
falling down. It reached its trunk out, smelling and searching,
flapped its ears, and gave a shake of its head. Tallulah reached
down and touched the umbilical cord, which still hung down,
then gently felt the baby’s head, face, and mouth.
On that same morning in March 1980, I was sitting at my desk
in my tent analyzing data when a safari vehicle arrived. I
reluctantly left my work and went out to see what the driver
wanted. He told me that my colleague Joyce Poole had sent him

BIRTHS AND BABIES

to tell me that “an elephant had been born in Q-18” and I was
to come immediately. I thanked him profusely because it was
very kind of him to go out of his way to come to the camp. I
leapt into my Land-Rover and started out to the other side of
Ol Tukai Orok, wondering where in the one-kilometer grid
square, which was designated by the coordinates Q-18, Joyce
might be. It took me less than ten minutes to find her.
Joyce had gone out to look for bulls that morning and had
spotted the TCs and TDs at 8:25 crossing the open plain to the
south of the woodland. She noticed that Tallulah was behaving
oddly and so she stopped and watched the group for a while.
She was very fortunate to see the birth and all the behavior
around Tallulah and the new baby from very close up. The
elephants were only about twenty yards away and sometimes
closer.
I arrived shortly after 10:00 and took over the observations
from Joyce. Although several hundred calves have been born in
Amboseli during the course of the study and there have been
times when three observers in three different vehicles have
been out with the elephants, only two births have ever been
witnessed by researchers working on the project and very few
anywhere in Africa. Possibly the majority of births occur at
night and perhaps those that do take place in the daytime
happen in secluded places.
By coincidence I had seen the other birth five days before. I
will describe that one before I continue with the story of
Tallulah and her calf because it presents an interesting contrast.
On March 25 I was watching a large aggregation of elephants
down at the far wet end of the Longinye swamp where I could
not take the vehicle. I was parked about 300 yards from the
elephants. They were all peacefully feeding in the long grass
when, at about 12:00, my attention was attracted to some
earflapping and rumbling vocalizations from members of the
DA and DB family units. Dinah, an adult female, was streaming
with secretions from her temporal glands and Deborah, an¬
other adult female, was standing in an unusual posture: Her
head was up, tail out, legs spread, and from under her tail,
halfway down between her hind legs, was a large bulge. She
appeared to be straining. After about 30 seconds she stepped
back with legs still spread and reached her trunk into the grass.

151

152

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

Dinah, Daisy (a 12-year-old female), Denise (Dinah’s five-yearold daughter), and Daniel (Deborah’s three-year-old son) all
came running over and also put their trunks down into the
grass. I could not see much from where I was, but Dinah and
Deborah seemed to be working at something with their trunks
and feet. After 12 minutes I saw a wet, shiny object wiggling in
the grass. Two minutes later it struggled up and there was a
baby elephant.
Deborah, an experienced mother who was approximately 47
years old and had had several calves, appeared relaxed and
competent from the moment the baby was born. The calf fell
down five times in the first half hour, but Deborah carefully got
it up by gently prying a foot under it and steadying it with her
trunk. The calf, a female, continuously explored its new
environment, reaching its trunk out, touching and smelling its
mother and other group members. The young females, Daisy
and Denise, were particularly fascinated with the new calf,
feeling it with their trunks and standing over it in a protective
manner. Daniel came over and felt his new sister once and then
apparently took no more interest.
When the calf was only 34 minutes old Deborah resumed
feeding; after 40 minutes the calf took its first shaky steps for¬
ward; and after one hour and 36 minutes it found Deborah’s
teats and suckled vigorously for over two minutes. Later it even
suckled from Dinah and was completely tolerated. Both Deborah
and Dinah stood quietly with the leg near the calf well forward
so it could reach the nipple. When I left three hours after the
birth the calf was walking well and steadily behind Deborah.
The contrast between Deborah’s behavior with her new calf
and Tallulah’s was striking. Tallulah was about 17 years old at
the time and had not had a calf before, but I was still surprised
when Joyce described Tallulah’s very disturbed state. While
Deborah had appeared unperturbed by the birth, Tallulah was
distinctly upset and apparently confused about what to do.
By the time I arrived, Tallulah, Tara, and the baby had gone
deep inside another clump of young acacia trees. It is common
for an adolescent female to accompany a new mother, but I
would have expected it to be Theodora, from Tallulah’s own
family, rather than Tara, Slit Ear’s 13-year-old daughter, who
stayed with Tallulah.

BIRTHS AND BABIES

When Tallulah had been out in the open earlier, Joyce had
had a good look at the baby and determined that it was a
female. After relating the events up to that point, Joyce left to
try to find the bull she had set out to observe earlier and I
started recording behavior at least every five minutes using the
time of birth, 8:44, as the theoretical starting point:
1029 I can hear the baby making suckling sounds. They are
deep within trees and bushes and I can’t see anything.
1034 Tallulah is backing and kicking dirt. Can see a little
now. Violently kicking ground.
1039 Continued breaking up of vegetation and trampling
by Tallulah. Tara remains relatively quiet.
1044 (two hours after birth) Still trampling. Clearing area?
Heard suckling sounds again but must be on Tara because
Tallulah too active.
1049 Calf is reaching and exploring Tara. Tallulah is still
trampling.
1052 Calf vocalizes — sort of a hoarse growl.
This type of behavior continued for another half hour, I
could see that the calf kept reaching out its trunk and exploring
the bodies of the two females. Several times it made sucking
motions and sounds against the side or leg of one of the
females, but it had not yet found the teats.
At 11:19, when the calf was just over two and a half hours
old, they came out into the open again, only a few yards from
my car. I could see the calf clearly. A baby elephant is almost a
perfect miniature of an adult except that it has no tusks and it
tends to have more hair. This calf had black hair on its
forehead, very red, bloodshot eyes, and the backs of its ears
were bright pink. Its hind legs were very stiff and it had
difficulty walking, but like Deborah’s calf it continuously ex¬
plored its new environment with its trunk. Tallulah and Tara
were alert, disturbed, and restless, and both continued to kick
the ground, loosening earth and throwing dust over them¬
selves.

153

154

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

1120 Calf walks to Tar. Tal turns and follows. Tal backs
toward calf. Tar turns, sways, head up. Both alert. Trunks
up, very nervous. Low rumble 2 x. Trunks up again.
1124 Tal backs around to get beside calf which is standing
with head to Tara’s tail. They are standing in the full sun.
Calf tries to suckle from Tar. She moves forward. Again Tal
backs around so calf beside her. It reaches toward Tar.
Umbilical cord still hanging.
1129 Tal turns around, calf still facing Tar. Tar reaches
toward it with trunk. Tal and Tara sway. Tal turns around
and reaches trunk to baby’s face 2 x . Calf s legs are wobbly
as stands. Still in sun. Tal turns and maneuvers near it.
Reaches for umbilical cord then shakes head gently. Calf
appears to be resting. Has been still.
1134 Tal pulls calf toward her. Calf standing, wobbling on
front legs, trunk on ground. Certainly seems weaker than
Deborah’s. Tal moves away from calf. Tar turns and reaches
trunk toward baby. It is definitely resting, in Tara’s shade.
Now Tar moves forward and Tal backs toward calf. Tal
reaches trunk to umbilicus 2 X . Possibly tried to pull bit off.
1139 Baby still resting. Tar moving around. Tal feeding.
1144 (3 hours after birth) Bit of blood on the ground. Tal
picks it up and eats it. Tal pushes Tar out of the way 2 X.
Baby still searching, exploring. Very wobbly. Tal is hopeless,
moves every time and does not put leg forward.
The calf was now over three hours old and I was sure that it
had not yet suckled. The two females seemed totally inept. At
this point I do not think the calf knew which female was its
mother and it was wasting a lot of time trying to find Tara’s
teats. Tallulah tried to maneuver so that the baby was beside
her but she did not have the experience to direct the calf to her
teats and then stand quietly with her leg forward so it could
suckle. She may have been delivering the afterbirth as blood
still dripped from her vulva, and this may have been one reason
why she was so restless. In any case she was rarely still for more
than a few seconds. Each time the calf got near Tallulah’s teat
the kicking motion prevented it from hnding the nipple. One

BIRTHS AND BABIES

time it almost got its mouth on the teat but promptly got hit in
the nose and was nearly knocked over. I found it very upsetting
and frustrating to watch.
In the next half hour the baby continued to try to find Tara’s
or Tallulah s teats. At one point it did find Tara’s teat and
suckled for about a minute but Tara had no milk. They
remained out in the hot sun and March is the hottest month of
the year in Amboseli. At 12:17 the calf gave up searching and
began to rest out in the full sun.

1221 Baby lies down. Tal starts kicking the grass all around
it. It struggles, back legs in air. Tar also kicks dirt. Tal goes
around, feels with trunk, kicks it while kicking grass. It sits
up, then lies down again. It’s still in the sun. I’m worried
that it is going to get dehydrated.
1224 Both are kicking grass all around it.
1227 Tal goes to the other side of calf and gently kicks it. It
struggles but doesn’t get up. Now she pushes on it.
1229 Still kicking dirt around and on calf and on them¬
selves.
1234 Calf struggles but doesn’t get up. In sun again.
1239 Calf almost completely buried in dirt and grass. Both
Tal and Tar making kicking motions around it. It’s breath¬
ing oddly. Struggles then lies still.
By now I was almost as frantic as Tallulah and Tara. The calf
seemed weak and unable to get up by itself and Tallulah did not
know how to pry the calf up with her foot, at the 'same time
steadying it with her trunk, in the way that Deborah did. When
they had nearly buried it I began to give up hope and assumed
I was watching the death of a newborn calf caused by the
inexperience of its mother. I wanted desperately to do “some¬
thing” but knew I could not and would not interfere. My palms
were sweating, my stomach was in a tight knot, and I wanted to
shout at Tallulah to tell her what to do, but, of course, it would
not have done any good.
Then, at just about 12:44, when the calf was four hours old,

155

156

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

Tallulah went around behind its head and put the tip of her
foot under its shoulder, and the baby, making a hoarse rum¬
bling noise, struggled to its feet. It walked over to Tara and
started searching for her teats again. It then moved to Tallulah
and searched all around her body and finally, at 12:51, when it
was four hours and seven minutes old, it found its mother’s teat
and suckled for one minute and five seconds. I felt like
cheering and clapping.
I watched them for another hour until they were just
beginning to walk slowly in the direction that the other Ts had
taken. In that hour Tallulah continued to move about, backing
and sometimes kneeling and straining, but she only produced
small bits of blood. I think she must have been delivering the
placenta in pieces. The calf explored, rested, tried several times
to suckle again, but was unsuccessful, and frequently uttered
the funny, deep baby rumble. It got stuck on a branch once and
Tara disentangled it. It came over to my car and bumped
against it three times. The females came over with it and did
not seem the least alarmed. I felt privileged to have their trust.
At 1:44, when it was five hours old, it looked stronger and was
fairly secure on its feet. Tallulah was feeding steadily for the
first time. I left them at 1:50 and drove back to camp feeling
totally wrung out and exhausted and not at all sure the calf was
going to make it.
Late in the afternoon of the same day, Tallulah, the calf, and
Tara arrived in the open glade at the southern end of my camp.
It meant that the baby had walked over a mile. Tania and
Tuskless’s families joined them and there was great excitement
as they greeted the females and inspected the baby. The next
morning I found Tallulah again and was pleased to see the
baby suckling well and looking strong. I spent the rest of the
day with them, doing special observations on the mother and
calf.
In the afternoon Tallulah, the calf, and Tara joined the
whole T bond group. I was confused for a moment, however,
when I saw a second tiny newborn calf. I soon discovered that
it was Tia’s. My notes read:
1650 Tia with a new baby, a male. This calf is strong,
suckles well. Has bloodshot eyes, not hairy. Still wobbly.

BIRTHS AND BABIES

Backs of ears pink. Exploring, walking over to a male. Other
group members aware of it, back toward it. Tia has no
blood, so must have been born last night or yesterday.
I noted that Tia’s older calf was not with her and wondered
where it was. A little later in the afternoon I found both Tia’s
C’76 and her older son, Right Fang, with Teresia several
hundred yards from the others. It has been suggested that the
old matriarchs act in a sort of grandmother role and it certainly
looked as if Teresia was playing that role on this day.
The next day, which was April 1, I set out early to try to find
the Ts again in order to continue my observations on the two
new calves. I searched all around the Ol Tukai Orok woodlands
and finally drove over to the Longinye swamp, and there, after
searching for more than three hours, I found them with yet
another new baby. This one was Slit Ear’s, and although I was
expecting her to have a calf, it was unusual to have three calves
born in a bond group in three days. Slit Ear’s calf, a female, was
quite hairy, with black hair on its head and back. It was very
wobbly and still had a bit of umbilical cord. Slit Ear had dark
stains on the insides of her hind legs and was streaming from
her temporal glands. I estimated the calf to be only a few
hours old.
The young females in the bond group — Tilly, Tonie, Tess,
Tara, Tamar, and Theodora — were almost beside themselves
with the excitement of three newborn calves. Although Tania’s
calf, Tom, had been born in August 1979, there had been no
other babies in the other three families since 1976. While the
interest by the females in these new calves was intense, the
juvenile males showed very little curiosity at all about the babies.
The young females kept trying to get as close to a baby as
possible. Tia and Tallulah were fairly tolerant of their advances
and attentions. Slit Ear allowed her older daughter Tara to stand
over the baby and fondle it, but when Theodora tried she threat¬
ened her. The babies seemed to bask in all the attention. They
freely went from female to female and tried to suckle from
anyone. They would reach up and suck from the nipple of the
flat-chested, undeveloped breast of an adolescent female and
seem to derive satisfaction from the suckling alone. The young
female would stand very still with her leg forward, reaching back

158

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

from time to time to touch the baby’s mouth, and if I could ever
say an elephant had an expression of total bliss on its face it would
be on one of these little females. After the baby finished I often
saw the female reach with her trunk and gently touch her nipples
as if in astonishment that they had some function. Presumably
this was all good practice for being a mother one day. Perhaps for
Tallulah it had been such a long time since anyone in her family
had had a calf that she truly did not have enough experience.
By the time these three T babies were born, I was almost
getting a bit blase about new calves. Baby elephants seemed to
be popping up all over. But there was a reason for this
profusion of calves in Amboseli. The baby boom was a result of
the severe drought in 1975 and 1976, during which the
elephants almost ceased reproductive activity. Only five con¬
ceptions took place in those two years. However, a few months
after the drought ended in early 1977, females renewed sexual
cycling. Most of the adult females in the population were
“available” to conceive and many did in 1977 and 1978.
Twenty-two months later, in late 1978, 1979, and 1980, the
babies appeared.
On November 25, 1978, I found Delia, whom I had seen in
estrus in February 1977, with the first tiny, newborn calf. I may
have been as excited as her whole family was. I too had not seen
a new baby for well over a year. The next month four more
calves were born; in 1979, 57 calves were born; and by April 1,
1980, another 28 calves had been born, making a total of 90
calves in one year and four months.
By the end of 1979 advisers and friends kept saying, “What
a marvelous opportunity for studying calf development,” and I
kept saying, “But I don’t have the time.” By then I had seven
years of data that needed to be analyzed and written up in the
form of scientific papers. That year the New York Zoological
Society had started sponsoring me and they expected me to
slow down on the held work and do a lot more desk work. I
agreed that that was what I should be doing and so resisted the
temptation to start a new study. Then, in February 1980,
George Schaller, the well-known wildlife biologist and director
of NYZS’s research division, came to Amboseli to visit Jonah,
who is employed by NYZS, Joyce, who had just started her
Ph.D. project on the bulls with support from NYZS, and me.

\

BIRTHS AND BABIES

We all went out to look at elephants and George took one look
at all those babies and said, “You must do a study of calf
development and behavior.” I bowed to the inevitable and in
March 1980 I put aside my mountains of data and started
systematic observations on the calves. I never regretted the
decision for a moment. The calves were delightful to watch and
they gave me all sorts of insights into adult behavior patterns
and elephant social behavior in general.
I decided to make observations on six newborn calves and six
calves who were nine months old and study both sets until the
end of the year. The two sets combined would span the first 18
months of an elephant calf s life. For the older set I chose three
males and three females who had been born in June 1979. Of
these I selected two with mothers who had never had a calf
before, two with mothers who had had one previous calf that
had died, and two with experienced mothers with one or more
surviving calves. For the newborn set I also wanted three males
and three females with mothers with a similar range of expe¬
rience. In this case I had to wait for appropriate calves to be
born so that I could start watching them from their first days of
life.
I was delighted that the three calves from the T families fit
my requirements because the Ts were usually easy to find and
very nice to work around. Two weeks after Slit Ear’s calf was
born Tuskless gave birth, which among other things meant that
four out of the six adult females in that bond group gave birth
to calves within three weeks of each other, suggesting a dehnite
breeding synchrony in those families. It also meant that I had
another calf to add to my set.
I decided to study all four of these calves, because, although
all lived in the same bond group, each was growing up under
different circumstances. Tallulah’s calf, a female, had no older
brothers or sisters; Tia’s, a male, had two older brothers; Slit
Ear’s, a female, had four older sisters; and Tuskless’s, a male,
had no siblings, but his mother had had one calf who had died
at three years of age. The fifth calf in the group, Tom, who was
not in my set but whom I watched interacting with the other
calves, had had no calves his own age to play with until these
others were born. However, Tom had not lacked companions,
for all the young females in the bond group paid a great deal of

159

160

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

attention to him. From the day he was born he was followed
and fondled and fussed over by five young females. Possibly as
a result of this undivided attention, Tom was always very social,
outgoing, and apparently self-assured, spending much of his
time away from his mother, Tania.
To simplify taking notes on a special data sheet, I gave each
of the calves a code name. I took its mother’s first two initials
and the last digit of the year it was born. Thus an example of a
code for a 1979 calf was LI9 for Lillian’s calf. For the 1980 T
calves the codes were TAO for Tallulah’s, TIO for Tia’s, SLO for
Slit Ear’s, and TUO for Tuskless’s. As the zero for 1980 tended
to become the letter 0 in my mind, these codes were also
pronounceable as names. Eventually all four of the T calves’
codes became their final names, which were then spelled Tao,
Tio, Slo, and Tuo. Most of the other calves born in 1980 and all
the calves born in other years kept their codes until they were
weaned and then were given names. LI9, for instance, became
Lewis.
When Tuskless’s calf was born in mid-April, I completed my
set of six newborn calves and the study was well under way. The
two other calves that made up the set were Lynne’s female born
on March 2 and Penelope’s female born on March 22. Lynne
had had a calf in 1976 who had died and Penelope was an
older, experienced mother with several surviving calves.
I learned a lot about these calves in their first year and
although I sometimes cursed them and their mothers when I
could not find them, I always enjoyed the sampling when I was
with them. I was interested in both the physical and the social
development of the calves. At birth an elephant calf weighs
around 260 pounds and stands about two feet nine inches at the
shoulder. Although this may sound big compared to most other
newborn animals, it is actually only 4 percent of an adult
female’s weight and 2 percent of an adult male’s. An elephant
has a lot of growing to do, especially a male.
A newborn elephant is considered “precocious” — that is, it is
able to walk at birth and keep up with the adults in the group.
However, that is just about all it can do. It is otherwise
completely dependent on the care of its mother and other
family members. In the first days of life a baby elephant is
almost totally helpless. It is barely able to see and apparently

BIRTHS AND BABIES

finds its mother mostly by smell, touch, and sound. It can walk
but only just — it moves along on stiff, wobbly legs and fre¬
quently gets stuck on a small root or a clump of grass from
which it has to be extricated, usually by an attentive adolescent
female. Its eyes are rimmed with red and the backs of its ears
are bright pink where the blood shows through the delicate
skin. Even the skin of the body, although rough, looks thin and
vulnerable compared to that of the older juveniles and adults.
It often has hair on its forehead, head, and back and this hair
is either black or, surprisingly, red. (I particularly like the little
redheads because they are easy to identify within the family.)
The baby’s trunk is its main medium of contact with the world
around it. It is constantly reaching, smelling, and touching with
it. At the same time the trunk is often a problem. For much of
the time the calf does not seem to know what to do with it. A
baby often stands vigorously swinging its trunk back and forth,
tossing it up and down, and sometimes whirling it around in a
circle. The highly flexible, wiggly trunk is what makes a baby
elephant look remarkably like a rubber toy. It often gets in the
way. I have seen a calf step on and trip over its trunk as it is
walking along. But the trunk is also a source of comfort. A calf
will frequently suck on it in the same way that a human infant
sucks its thumb.
In the first months of life a new calf spends most of its time
resting and following its mother with brief intervals for suckling
and exploring. The calf is very rarely more than a few feet from
its mother and usually less than a foot from her, often touching
her by leaning on her leg or by resting its head against some
part of her body. If the calf strays away from its mother, either
in confusion or while exploring, the mother or an older female
calf will follow it.
In the observations I did called “focal samples” (because the
observer focuses on one animal for a given amount of time), I
noted down, among other things, who the calf s nearest neigh¬
bors were at five-minute intervals. Over 90 percent of the time
the newborn’s nearest neighbor was its mother and the next
nearest neighbor was often a young female from the family or
the older sibling of the calf, either its sister or brother, but more
likely a sister if the calf had one. Older brothers tended to move
off from the mother and new calf.

161

162

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

The mother makes soft, almost humming, vocalizations to
her calf, which probably helps to keep them together. If the
baby gets distressed for any reason, such as falling down,
getting stuck in a bush, or getting pushed by an older animal,
it will let out a loud, hoarse, squeaky-door cry that brings
instant results. All the young females in the group will rush
over to it and try to help, sometimes causing more confusion
than assistance by getting in the way of the mother. When the
calf gets older, the mother often allows the young females to
deal with her calfs problem while she continues to feed.
Distress calls from babies are fairly frequent, and one gets the
impression that the calf is not often truly in trouble.
From the first day of life the calf explores its environment. It
smells and touches and tries to pull at things; it reaches out to
any and every elephant that comes near it, apparently with no
fear at all. Fear is something it has to learn. Newborn calves
frequently come over and touch my Land-Rover, sometimes to
the dismay of their mothers or baby-sitters. In the families that
are not as habituated as are the Ts, the conflict in the females
is visible. They perceive the baby to be in danger but they are
too frightened themselves to come right up to the car to pull the
calf away. They stand with heads high, swinging a foot, or
shuffling back and forth. The baby usually touches the fender
or side of the car one or two times, or sometimes butts the car
with its head, but soon gets bored and wanders back to its
caretakers, who pull it toward them and feel it, and then give a
shake of their heads or a mock charge at me in disapproval.
I was surprised at how early a new calf starts to use its trunk
for manipulating objects. From the first week of life a calf
begins to try to pick things up in its trunk. Sticks seem to be the
favorite item. A calf is comically inept as time after time it tries
to wrap its rubbery, apparently out-of-control appendage
around a small stick or a blade of grass. Sometimes it gives up
but often I was impressed by the perseverance and concentra¬
tion that a little calf puts into a task. Eventually it lifts the stick,
either grasping it with the “fingers” on the trunk tip or
precariously balancing it in the curve of the trunk.
After the first week or so of life, the calf has gained strength
and coordination and is able to walk well, even run. Then it can
start to interact more with the other members of its family and

BIRTHS AND BABIES

bond group and learn how to function in its complex social
world. It has to learn the protocol of interacting with siblings,
other group members, strangers, adult bulls, or simply with
individuals that are bigger or smaller than it is.
One day I was doing a focal sample on Tallulah’s calf, Tao,
and discovered how Tom had overcome the problem of being
a different size in playing with the smaller calves in his bond
group. The females and older juveniles were peacefully feeding
in a lush area. Tom had been feeding too and then lay down to
rest in the grass. Tao spotted him almost immediately and
quickly approached and started to climb on top of him, a
favorite game of all young calves. Tom wiggled and kicked and
Tao fell off and they both wiggled and kicked with trunks and
legs entwined. Tom, who was a particularly robust calf, kicked
a bit harder and Tao jumped up and ran back to Tallulah. Tom
got up and followed, but instead of trying to engage her in play
directly, he lay down flat on his side beside her. She turned, saw
him, and immediately climbed on him again. Once more they
wiggled and kicked and when it became too intense Tao
jumped up and ran to Tallulah. Again Tom came and lay down
beside her. In all he did it four times.
Earlier in the year I had seen a large adult bull, Mark, lie
down in an upright position in order to spar with another bull
who was considerably smaller than he was. They had sparred
playfully and briefly with both standing, but the young bull,
MHO, turned away, and although Mark followed, MHO would
not spar with him again. Then Mark sank down on his knees
with his rear legs out behind him, and as soon as MHO saw him
he came straight over and started sparring. MHO was now the
taller of the two. After seeing Tom and Tao playing I wondered
if Mark had recalled this technique for getting a smaller animal
to play from his childhood.
By watching the six babies on a regular basis over the months
I was able to determine when they reached important stages in
their development. Perhaps the most important was when they
started to eat. It turned out to be a bit earlier than I had
thought. All six calves began to spend more time fiddling with
vegetation at about three months old, and between three and
four months each managed to get some blades of grass into its
mouth and chew and swallow them. At this point the actual

164

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

amount of food they were ingesting must have been small
because it took a great deal of effort to break off a blade of
grass, grasp it in the trunk, and get it to the mouth. It could
take well over a minute, whereas an adult could easily eat nine
large trunkfuls in a minute. So often I saw a calf twirl and twirl
its trunk around a single blade of grass, until hnally it broke off,
and then invariably it would drop it and have to spend even
more time trying to pick it up. Eventually it would get the blade
firmly in its trunk, lift it up, and then, apparently forgetting
what the whole purpose was, deposit the grass on the top of its
head.
From four months on the calves gradually spent more and
more time feeding and by six months old they were getting a
significant amount of vegetation in their diet. The other set of
calves, which I started observing when they were nine months
old, were already spending more than 40 percent of their time
feeding. Nevertheless, the rate at which they suckled had
decreased only slightly. They needed both the milk and the
vegetation to fulfill their nutritional needs. When they reached
the stage of feeding in earnest, it was interesting to watch them
learning what to eat and how to handle it. A calf will frequently
reach up into the mouth of its mother or older brother or sister
and pull out a bit of what they are eating. I assumed that in this
way the calf was learning what species of vegetation to eat. At
other times the calf would stand almost under the chin of its
mother or other relative and pick up the bits of vegetation that
she had loosened or dropped in her own feeding. Some of the
tough, short grasses needed to be kicked in order to break a
clump off. The calves did not seem able to manage this
maneuver and in the areas where this was the only vegetation
available they had to take the leftovers from the other family
members. Another technique used by the young calves was
simply to kneel down and bite the grass off with their teeth. I
always considered this cheating.
Around the same time that they began to feed on vegetation
the calves learned how to drink with their trunks. Again this
skill came much earlier than I had thought. I had estimated
that it took about a year to master the technique of drawing
water up into their trunks and then tipping their heads back
and releasing the water into their mouths. The small calves

BIRTHS AND BABIES

knelt down in the water and drank with their mouths, but by
three to four months they were already trying to use their
trunks. Granted they spilled most of the water in the process,
but at least they tried. By four to five months old they were
fairly proficient at it.
It was always a delight to spend time with the calves. Needless
to say I got particularly attached to the twelve that I was
watching. The older ones were perhaps not quite so endearing
as the little ones, but by nine months old they had developed
distinct personalities. Their play bouts were also more interest¬
ing because they were much better coordinated and stronger
than the younger ones.
Calf play takes several forms. Most often the calves engage
in head-on sparring but since they have no tusks they merely
run at each other and butt their heads together. They also
chase one another, the pursuer often grabbing the tale of the
fleer. They love climbing on top of each other, particularly
when they are in a mud wallow. Then there is often a great
heap of calves all wiggling and scrabbling and slipping and
sliding in the glutinous mud. Sometimes calves will mount
each other in the sexual posture and it is almost always a male
calf who does the mounting.
There are definite differences in physical development and
behavior between the sexes at a very early age. To skip ahead a
little in time, in 1982, much to my delight, my former campmate Phyllis Lee returned to Amboseli after completing her
Ph.D. on social development in infant vervet monkeys. With
sponsorship from the National Geographic Society, she began
an intensive two-year study of elephant calves. One of her main
interests was these sex differences. Using both my 1980-81
study and her later research, we combined results and pub¬
lished a joint scientific paper on the differences in suckling
behavior and growth rates of male and female calves and the
differences in maternal behavior toward the sexes.
It is an accepted tenet of evolutionary biology that an
animal’s primary goal is reproductive success; that is, each
animal attempts to have as many healthy, robust offspring as
possible reach reproductive age and breed. In species with
polygynous mating systems, a male might mate with many
females, thereby producing far more offspring than a single

165

166

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

female could in her lifetime. In these species, it is predicted that
a mother should invest more time and energy in her male
offspring than in her female offspring. In the case of elephants,
if a female can raise one large, strong male who will father
many calves, she will probably have more descendants than if
she had several successful daughters. However, some males
may never compete successfully and may end up siring no
offspring, while daughters will probably produce some calves,
so biologically it may be a gamble to invest more in sons. All the
same, theoretically it is a chance worth taking. I hasten to add
that the goal that motivates an individual’s behavior is not a
conscious one.
The red deer, an animal that has been extensively studied
over many years by a team of scientists led by Tim CluttonBrock, is similar to the elephant in that females live in small
families, males compete intensively for females, and male size
and strength are determining factors in who mates with the
females. Clutton-Brock and his colleagues showed that male
offspring of red deer received more milk and were weaned at
an older age than female offspring. The early growth of the
stag seemed to be very important in how successful it was as an
adult.
Phyllis and I wondered if anything like this was going on
among elephants. Our data revealed that males attempted to
suckle more often than females and that they were also more
successful in their attempts. When a male tried to suckle and
the mother would not stand still or walked away after only a few
seconds, a male calf tended to scream in protest more often
than a female. Elephant mothers were remarkably tolerant of
their calves’ tantrums and always gave in and let them suckle.
Thus, since the males demanded more milk, they actually got
more. At the same time we found that males grew faster from
birth, and presumably they needed more milk for this growth.
Supporting this theory was the mortality rates of male and
female calves. During wet years there was no difference in calf
survivorship between males and females, but during drought
years significantly more males died than females. We postulated
that during dry years some mothers were unable to sustain milk
production at a level that met the metabolic requirements of
their sons and so male calves were more likely to die. In

BIRTHS AND BABIES

addition we found that if a mother had a surviving male calf the
interval between the birth of that calf and the next calf was
longer than if the first calf was female. Thus, since mothers
suckled calves right up until the birth of their next calves, male
calves tended to be weaned at an older age than females.
Therefore, our results show that mothers do invest more in
male calves in the early years but we cannot conclude that they
are doing so in order for males to grow faster and thus develop
into large, strong adults with better chances at reproductive
success. Mothers may be forced to invest more in males simply
because they grow faster, demand more, and die if they do not
get sufficient nutrition. The results in either case are the same
in evolutionary terms. Nevertheless, in the long run maternal
investment in the two sexes seems to even out for elephants, for
sons leave their mothers at puberty and daughters stay on in
the family, where they are supported and aided by their
mothers for years to come.
During 1980 an event occurred that gave me an unexpected
opportunity to look at sex differences between siblings. By the
end of May, 99 calves had been born to the Amboseli population
since the births had resumed in late November 1978. This had
been a good time for the elephants in terms of food abundance,
lack of poaching and spearing, and particularly reproductive
success, and I decided that when the one hundredth calf was
born I would have a small celebration. In early June I had to go
to Nairobi to do some work for the African Wildlife Founda¬
tion. I asked Joyce to keep her eye out for Estella, the matriarch
of the EA family, because I expected her to have the one
hundredth calf. I had seen Estella in estrus 22 months before.
Joyce came to Nairobi about a week after I did and said, “Boy,
do I have news for you. Estella gave birth to the one hundredth
calf but also to the one hundred and first. She had twins!”
I was thrilled and could not wait to see them. Twinning had
been recorded in elephants before, but I had not seen it yet in
Amboseli. In areas where elephants are culled and postmor¬
tems are carried out, twin fetuses are found from time to time,
and recently there was a case of triplet fetuses in an elephant in
Zimbabwe. When the well-known reproductive biologist Rich¬
ard Laws was working in East Africa in the 1960s, he estimated
the incidence of twinning in elephants to be about 1 percent.

167

My statistic of twins born on the one hundredth birth 6t rather
neatly and pleased Dr. Laws when I told him.
Although conceptions of twins occur at a rate similar to that
in humans, what appears to be rare among elephants is for both
twins to survive. Twins were born to a young female in Lake
Manyara in 1976 but one died when it was five months old.
There was also a case of twins born in the Aberdare National
Park in Kenya, but again one died after a few months. Under
most circumstances a female can probably not produce enough
milk to nourish two calves. I was very anxious to see what would
happen to Estella’s twins.
I went back down to Amboseli on June 16 and found Estella
two days later. There was a newborn calf with her, but only one.
I waited, hoping the other might be lying down where I could
not see it, but it was soon clear that it was not there. I was
terribly disappointed, thinking that it had died and I had
missed seeing them together. Then from around a corner came
Elfrida, Estella’s nine-year-old daughter, with another newborn
calf. This was definitely not hers because she had no breast
development at all. They joined Estella and the two calves stood
together. Then I could see that they were almost exactly the
same size and they had the same tight curly black hair on their
foreheads. One was a male and one a female.
A while later the twins began to suckle from Estella with one
on one side and the other on the other side. It started out
peacefully enough but then the male calf ducked under Estella
and pushed his sister off the nipple. She went around to the
other side, and again he rushed under and pushed her off, with
hoarse cries and growling rumbles from her or possibly from
both of them. I was surprised at how much aggression there
was between them. It was always the male, who was just slightly
bigger, who initiated the aggression, and he was usually suc¬
cessful at disrupting the female’s suckling.
Over the next week as I watched them I worried that the
female would not make it, but she was smarter than I thought.
When the twins were not suckling they did not fight and they
actually spent quite a lot of time playing together. One day I
discovered what the female was doing to gain equal suckling
time. I watched the two of them playing for about ten minutes,
which was a long play bout for small calves. They ran and fell

BIRTHS AND BABIES

in the long grass, climbed on one another, and butted each
other head to head. Finally the male tired and lay down to go
to sleep. As soon as he did the female moved to the far side of
Estella where he could not see her and suckled in peace for over
three minutes. Eventually, after several weeks, the fighting
stopped and I saw no aggression between them again.
I added these two calves to my set of six newborns and
watched them systematically over the next nine months. They
were given codes (ESO and ETO) but I also decided to give them
names right away because they were special. I could not think
of any famous twins whose names started with E. Estella means
“star,” so I decided on an astronomical theme and came up with
Eclipse for the female (there was a total eclipse of the sun in
Kenya in 1980) and Equinox for the male. Followers of
astrological charts were pleased to know that the twins were
born under the sign of Gemini.
I never stopped worrying about the twins. I wanted very
much for them to survive and each time I found the EAs I held
my breath until I saw that both were there. But if anyone was
going to have twins that survived I thought it would be a female
like Estella. She was a matriarch, an older, experienced mother
with several surviving offspring, and it just so happened that
her next oldest calves were both females: Elvira, who was five
years old, and Elfrida, who was nine. They each spent a lot of
time caring for the twins.
Although 1980 was not a year of good rainfall there was still
abundant vegetation from the previous three wet years and
Estella had plenty to eat and appeared able to produce enough
milk for both calves. The twins survived and I expect it was a
rare case of all the right circumstances coming together. Today,
as I write this, the twins have reached their sixth birthday and
they have a younger sister, born in December 1985. They were
completely weaned after her birth. Equinox is bigger than his
sister, Eclipse, but they are both considerably smaller than
other calves of the same age. However, they seem in good
condition. With cattle, when a cow gives birth to male and
female twins, the female is always barren and is called a
“freemartin.” Many people have asked me if this will happen to
the elephant twins. I will have to wait at least another six or
seven years to find out.

169

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

In the meantime, the T families had two more births in 1980.
In early November Tonie of the TA family gave birth near my
camp. The calf was either born dead or it died shortly after. I
suspect that stillbirths and neonatal deaths are fairly common
in females giving birth to their hrst calves, as Tonie was doing.
What was unusual with this birth and death was that Tonie
refused to abandon the dead calf. I was in Nairobi, but
fortunately once again Joyce was on the scene. In addition some
local tourists from Nairobi, Clare and Brian Shorter, keen
wildlife enthusiasts, also saw Tonie and the dead calf, and they
took pictures and notes. Joyce had found Tonie when the calf
was already dead. By then the rest of her family had left her to
go off and feed. Tonie was out in the hot sun in a desolate area
of hard pan and saltbushes. She was standing over the dead calf
and threatening anyone or anything that tried to come near it.
Joyce’s observations indicated that Tonie remained with it for
four full days.
The Shorters discovered Tonie on the third day. They
arrived to find two lionesses dragging the dead baby away.
Tonie suddenly saw what was happening and charged the
lionesses, chasing them off. She then stood over the carcass,
keeping the lions at bay for what the Shorters estimated was 30
hours. On the second morning after they had first sighted her,
they found four lions feeding on the dead calf and no sign of
Tonie. She had finally given up her vigil, probably because of
thirst. She had been a fierce and brave mother and I hoped she
would soon get pregnant again and have better luck with her
next calf.
I was not anticipating any other births in the T families
during the remaining months of 1980. Three of the young
females, Tara, Tilly, and Theodora, came into estrus for the
first time that year and so they were expected to have babies in
1982, and the fourth young female, Tess, did not show signs of
being pregnant. In fact I was wondering if she was able to have
a calf because she was already 17 years old and had not yet
given birth. The other adult females all had small calves except
for Teresia. In 1980 Teresia was about 58 years old. She had
had her last calf nine years before, in 1971, at the age of 49.
The reproductive studies carried out on culled elephants
su§§ested that females reached the equivalent of menopause

BIRTHS AND BABIES

around 55, at which point they entered a sort of grandmother
class and their experience and wisdom were used to lead the
families. I thought that Teresia had probably arrived at that
time in her life. Once again the Amboseli elephants had a
surprise in store for me.
On December 20 I was out in the Olodo Are woodlands and
found a large aggregation of elephants. The short rains had
come by then and there was green grass and the elephants were
feeling good. I had been in the section with the Ts, trying to do
focal samples on the babies. The elephants had been walking
and feeding when suddenly something sparked them off and
they started running across the open pan, all 200 of them. But
it was not panic running, which is quiet and fast and smooth.
This was something I called “floppy running,” where the
elephants put their heads down and let their ears and trunk
hang loose so that they flap and wave about as they run. At the
same time they make the loud, pulsating play trumpet. My
notes read:
1020 The large group behind starts to move fast but play
trumpeting. They all start running. It has just started to rain
a little. Now all running and a great deal of noise.
1030 Still a lot of noise. Floppy running.
1040 Still floppy running and trumpeting, whirling and
attacking. How can one do a serious study of animals that
behave this way!
1045 Back to other section. They come onto pan and all
floppy run full speed across, play trumpeting like mad.
Even Slit Ear and Big T [old matriarch of the BBs]. Except
Teresia who sedately walks across. The Ts lift heads and
charge at imaginary things.
On December 26 I found all the Ts together, resting under
some trees. Teresia was on her own, 30 yards away, standing
out in the sun. She looked tired, and definitely older than ever,
partially because she had broken off her other tusk sometime
during that year and only had two stumps left. She had seemed
slow and lethargic on the day of the mass play, and today she

172

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

was acting strangely by resting away from her family. I thought
her behavior might be due to old age.
On New Year’s Day, 1981, I was out in Longinye swamp and
came upon the TCs and TDs. I did a census of the families as
they came by and as usual Teresia was at the rear, this time with
Theodora. But as they got closer I realized that there was also
a tiny newborn baby with her. It was walking well and looked
strong and healthy. It still had a bit of umbilical cord hanging
down and, as with all newborn calves, the backs of its ears were
bright pink. I thought it was probably a day or two old, making
it born on the thirtieth or thirty-first of December, 1980. I had
not noticed any change in Teresia’s breasts, but perhaps I had
not been looking carefully. She now had nearly full breasts and
was definitely lactating. I thought it was remarkable that a
female her age could still have a calf. No wonder she had been
slow and sedate ten days before.
I stayed with the Ts for the next four hours, mostly doing
samples on the other calves but keeping an eye on Teresia’s as
well. It was a male and seemed fine to me. The only unusual
thing I noted about him was that he seemed to suckle more
often than other newborns.
I saw Teresia and her calf two more times in the next two
weeks and then on January 20 I found the family again. The
calf was gone and Teresia was secreting from her temporal
glands. For some reason I was not surprised. I think I half
expected it not to survive. Earlier in the year Virginia of the VA
family, whom I estimated to be 52 years old, gave birth to a calf
that lived for only about a month. She too had not had a calf
since 1971. It appeared that, rather than a complete cessation
of ovulation, the rate at which females breed slows down as they
get older, and if they do give birth the chances of the calf
surviving are reduced. It could be that Teresia and Virginia
could no longer produce enough milk for their calves or that
the calves had genetic defects. I have no proof for either theory
but for whatever reason these two calves did not survive during
a time when calf mortality in general was very low. Neither
female produced another calf after 1980, although both con¬
tinued to come into estrus from time to time.
Teresia may have lost this final calf but on the whole she
probably did fairly well over her lifetime. At the end of 1980

BIRTHS AND BABIES

she remained with her son Tolstoy, a tall young male who
looked as if he would turn into a large, successful bull, and her
grandson Tim, who was also showing signs of one day becoming
a fine bull. In Teresia s long life she had probably raised several
other sons who had become independent before my study
began and were very likely fathering her grandchildren. On the
female side of the lineage she remained with her daughter
Theodora, her granddaughter Tallulah, and her great grand¬
daughter Tao. Her genes were certainly carrying on into the
next generations.
The Ts in general had experienced a very good year in 1980.
They increased their numbers and at least three more females,
possibly four, were pregnant. Shortly after Slit Ear and Tia
gave birth to their new calves, I gave their ’76 calves names. It
was getting even more difficult to find unique three-letter
beginnings to “T” names but I came up with Tabitha for Slit
Ear’s female and Taddeus for Tia’s male. There were now 24
animals in the four families. After the death of Teresia’s calf
the structure of the four families looked like this:

Tuskless (62)
Tuo (80)

9
3

Teddy (66)

3

Tonie (67)

9

Tilly (70)

9

tb

Tania (44)
Tom (79)
Toby (73)

9
3
3

tc

Slit Ear (36)
Slo (80)
Tabitha (76)
Tamar (71)
Tara (67)
Tess (63)

9
9
9
9
9
9

Tia (50)
Tio (80)
Taddeus (76)
Right Fang (70)

9
3
3
3

ta

I

173

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

td

Teresia (22)
Tolstoy (71)
Theodora (67)

8

9

Tallulah (63)
Tao (80)

9
9

Tim (69)

8

9

CSnapfer VII

Elephants and People
1981

lit was November 1978, on a dark, moonless night. The sun
had set two hours before, when Tuskless had led her little band
out of Longinye swamp. They traveled first to the Amboseli
Lodge garbage dump and then to the Safari Lodge pit,
checking them out for new deposits. They found some fresh
refuse in the pit and picked out what they liked before
continuing on across the open pan to the Ol Tukai Orok
woodlands and the public campsite. They wandered through
the area, deliberately passing close to the camps and carefully
smelling and searching for food boxes. Most of the campers
had finished eating and had retired to their tents, but in one
clearing some people were sitting around a table enjoying their
dinner.
Tuskless broke through the palms at the edge of the glade
and stood for a moment taking in the scene. The campers
looked up and saw her, became excited, and started to comment
and laugh. Tuskless moved toward them in a straight line. The
laughter grew louder and then took on a hysterical note. The

177

178

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

people leapt out of their chairs and started shouting, clapping
their hands, waving their arms, and banging pots and pans
together. Tuskless ignored them and kept coming. The camp¬
ers backed off and fled for their car. They huddled inside with
all the doors and windows closed, watching helplessly as Tusk¬
less, joined by her calf and Teddy, Tonie, and Tilly, ate every
bit of food they could find on the table and in the safari boxes
on the ground nearby. When all conceivable food items were
devoured, the elephants ambled away into the palms. The
campers waited a long time before cautiously emerging to
inspect the damage.
In the meantime Tuskless and her family met up with Tania
and her calf and exchanged deep greeting rumbles and ear
flaps. They fed on grass and palm fronds for a while before
emerging into a large clearing where a permanent camp had
been based for a long time. They knew it well. They also knew
the people who lived there—a tiny, fierce African man and
others who got in their vehicles and frightened the elephants
away when they came too close. Tuskless knew she had to be
careful when she came into this camp and so she never just
boldly walked in but used an indirect approach.
Tuskless, Teddy, and the others began feeding around the
periphery of this camp, apparently minding their own business
and concentrating on eating grass. However, surreptitiously,
Tuskless turned the tip of her trunk toward the kitchen and the
tents to smell what and who was there. Wafting from the place
where the food was kept was the delicious odor of very ripe
bananas. Tuskless loved bananas. She had first tasted them at
the lodge feeding place, where a man came twice a day with a
wheelbarrow full of vegetable and fruit scraps. These were
usually peels and old, outer leaves of lettuces and cabbages. But
one day there was a whole stalk of overripe, almost fermented
bananas. Tuskless liked the smell immediately, plucked one off
the stalk, popped it in her mouth, and savored the sweet taste.
She managed to eat most of them, sharing as few as possible
with the others. From that day on she particularly sought out
bananas.
On this evening the smell was irresistible. She moved closer to
the kitchen—a flimsy structure made out of a few wooden
posts, sisal poles, chicken wire, and roofing felt. She could smell

ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE

other good things as well—pineapples, oranges, and various
vegetables. She also noticed that it was unusually quiet in the
camp tonight. There were no voices and there was no strong,
immediate smell of human. She stopped feeding and rumbled
gently. Tania answered from within the palms with her unmis¬
takable long, rolling rumble, but stayed where she was. Teddy,
Tome, and Tilly also answered and they walked over to join
Tuskless.
These four animals, plus Tuskless’s two-year-old calf, slowly
approached the kitchen with their trunks held out in front of
them. They got within a few feet and stopped and listened. Still
there were no sounds of people. Tuskless reached her trunk
out and felt the outer wall of the kitchen. She wrapped her
trunk around a sisal pole and pulled. There was a tearing noise
as the pole was wrenched away. No one came out of a tent to
chase them. The others moved forward and also started pulling
on the poles and the wire. Tuskless quickly made a sizable hole
in one wall of the kitchen. She reached her trunk in and tried
to feel for the bananas, but they were on the opposite side of
the kitchen and a table and a cupboard were in her way. She
became impatient and leaned her head against the wall and
pushed. The building swayed before collapsing sideways. This
did not help matters; the bananas were under the tilted-over
wall and roof. But Tuskless was undeterred. She went around
to the other side, which was more or less intact, and started
forcing her way through that wall. Once she got her head inside
she began to pull things out, push things over, open things up,
and gather in as much food as she could in as short a time as
possible.
The other family members had crowded in beside and
behind Tuskless to get as much as they could too. The calf was
doing very well because she could squeeze in under the fallen
roof and get to things the others could not. Only Tania and her
calf were uninvolved. They continued to feed on the natural
vegetation at the periphery of the camp and refused to join the
feast.
The bananas went first, of course, closely followed by the
pineapples, oranges, mangoes, and papayas. These fruits, even
large pineapples, could be placed whole in the mouth and
crushed in the huge grinding molars with a great gush of juice.

179

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

It was near-ecstasy. The vegetables—carrots, potatoes, toma¬
toes, onions, lettuces, cabbages, cauliflowers, cucumbers, avo¬
cados, string beans, zucchini, eggplants—went soon after. Most
of the fruits and vegetables were stored in tin trunks but this
posed no problem for an elephant. The tin trunk was lifted up
and turned upside down and stepped on a bit and kicked about
if necessary, until it disgorged its contents.
Once the fresh produce was finished Tuskless began to
search around for other delicacies. She could smell bread and
cookies and crackers in one wooden cupboard. This was
knocked down and smashed open. The bread was quickly
snatched up and then the cookies and crackers were eaten, box
or plastic bag and all. Next a small camping fridge and a cooler
were crushed, but neither contained anything interesting.
Another cupboard with glasses and plates in it was tipped
sideways, and broken glass joined the other wreckage on the
dirt floor of the kitchen. The bigger fridge was pulled and
dragged from its place until it toppled over, disconnected from
its gas cylinder. Noxious propane gas hissed out of the dangling
tube with a sound and smell that would certainly have sent
lesser elephants away.
Just as Tuskless and Teddy were tackling the third cupboard,
with the jams and spices in it, they heard the engine of a car
coming in their direction. A few minutes later the headlights
swept around the clump of palm trees at the clearing entrance
and shown brightly on the five elephants standing in, on, and
around the totally destroyed kitchen. The car hesitated for only
a moment and then the engine roared and the car headed for
them. Each elephant grabbed a last trunkful and started
backing or turning away, reluctantly abandoning the banquet.
Tuskless held her ground a little longer than the others but the
vehicle came straight for her, making loud engine noises, and
she too left, carrying a box of spaghetti in her trunk while
chewing on a paper bag full of half a pound of garlic.
I can still close my eyes and vividly see that disastrous scene as
I drove around the corner into the camp and our lights shown
on what had been the kitchen. It was November 4, 1978, two to
three years before most of the other events in this chapter, but
for me it was the beginning of a new attitude toward some of

ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE

the elephants and a new way of living in the camp with them.
On this evening I was with my camp-mate Phyllis and Warren
and Genny Garst, filmmakers from the Wild Kingdom TV
program, who were staying with us to him Phyllis’s work on the
vervets. (They had done a program on the elephant project the
year before.) When I saw the elephants I had no option but to
go straight for them. They knew my Land-Rover and knew I
would harass them till they left. I would never actually hit an
elephant with my vehicle but I would get within a few feet, and
this was enough to make one move.
As soon as the elephants left, I quickly got out of the
Land-Rover and crawled into the kitchen because I could hear
and smell gas escaping. I found the gas cylinder and removed
the regulator to close off the valve. I thought later how horrible
it would have been if a spark had set off the gas while the
elephants were there. The rickety, dry kitchen would have gone
up in flames in seconds.
As angry as I was at Tuskless and her gang, I did not want
them to get killed or wounded. And in any case I mostly blamed
myself for what had happened that night. An unusual set of
circumstances had conspired to lead Tuskless to our kitchen.
First and probably most important, my cook/camp worker,
Masaku, went away for five days’ leave on November 3. On the
same day Phyllis came back from a trip to Nairobi with a huge
load of groceries, meat, and fresh fruit and vegetables, includ¬
ing some overripe bananas with which she was going to make
banana bread. The next day the Garsts arrived with yet another
huge load of food. Since it was their first night there and since
Masaku was away, they invited us to have dinner at one of the
lodges. We gladly accepted.
Previously we had left the camp unattended on many occa¬
sions. Elephants had broken into the kitchen two years before
when no one had been in the camp. It may or may not have
been Tuskless; there were also a few males around who raided
camps then. They had bashed through one corner and had
dragged out a tin trunk, crumpled it fairly badly, and eaten its
contents. The trunk had been standing open. After that we
carefully put food away and closed all the trunks to reduce the
tempting odors, and we had not been raided again. On the
evening of the fourth we put away as much food as we could,

181

182

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

but there was so much that we could barely close the trunks. We
even locked some of the Garsts’ food in their Toyota so that it
would not be left exposed in the kitchen. In the early evening
we had seen Tuskless leaving Longinye and heading in our
general direction. We should have known better.
By the latter half of 1978 Tuskless had become very, very bad
about raiding camps. She and her group sometimes raided as
many as three or four camps a day, both at night and in the
daytime. She checked out our camp almost daily, but when she
got too interested in the kitchen she was chased away by
Masaku, who, despite having only one eye, was wickedly
accurate at throwing empty wine bottles. Although the bottles
did not hurt, Tuskless did not appreciate having one land
between her eyes. Masaku usually just had to come out of his
tent and she and the others would move off, nonchalantly
feeding as if they had never even known there was a kitchen in
camp. We thought we had arrived at some sort of understand¬
ing with Tuskless but obviously had not. She was just waiting
for her chance.
And what a reward she got. She and the others ate all of our
fresh food, except for what was in the Toyota, and most of our
staples. What they did not eat they mostly ruined. It was a
horrific mess. We started cleaning things up immediately,
working until after midnight. We ended up putting the refrig¬
erator and one cupboard with the remaining food in a closed
vehicle in case the elephants decided to come back.
The next morning we woke to the full glory of the wreckage.
It definitely looked worse in daylight. We began sifting and
sorting through the debris. I think Phyllis and I were most
annoyed to discover that they had broken the full bottle of
Scotch that Phyllis had just bought for the camp. It was a luxury
we sometimes rewarded ourselves with but one we could rarely
afford. I was also unhappy about my crushed camping fridge,
which I had had for several years and was fond of. My new
cooler was unrecognizable.
Warren and Genny pitched in and helped us clean up and
repair things. After a preliminary sorting out Phyllis and I went
over to the park headquarters at Ol Tukai and picked up three
fundis (Kiswahili for skilled workers,, in this case carpenters) and
brought them back to rebuild the kitchen. They tore everything

ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE

down and started from scratch. By working extremely hard, we
managed to get the kitchen finished by dark. There was not
much food in it, but at least we could set up the refrigerator,
put what there was away, and cook something for dinner.
From that day on we never left the camp unguarded for
more than the ten minutes it took to drive to Ol Tukai and back
on Sundays, when we dropped Masaku off in the morning or
picked him up again in the evening. Anytime Masaku was away
one of us would have to stay in to guard the camp. Even now
Tuskless and her group come almost daily to feed in and
around the camp, checking things out and surreptitiously
smelling in the direction of the kitchen. We know if we relax
our guard that she will be in there in a flash.
The story behind Tuskless’s camp raiding and garbage
eating is the old one of people trying to become too familiar
with wild animals. It is similar to the problems with bears in the
U S. national parks. Ironically, two months before our raid, I
was asked by the warden at the time, Joe Kioko, to write a
report on elephant raiding, including suggestions for alleviat¬
ing the problem. Part of my report follows:
It is necessary to understand the background to the problem
in order to have any hope of solving it. I believe that the
whole problem lies in the improper disposal of garbage,
aggravated by a period of actual feeding of the elephants at
Amboseli Lodge. The garbage pits at the Amboseli Lodge
and the Ol Tukai bandas [small cabins with self-help accom¬
modation] are merely slight depressions in the ground. The
TA family is one of the central Amboseli groups that use the
Longinye swamp in the day and the Ol Tukai Orok wood¬
lands in the morning and evening. Their route to Longinye
in the morning passes near the Amboseli Lodge garbage pit,
and their route out of the swamp at night passes near the
bandas’ garbage pit. At some point, I estimate around 1973,
one or more of the elephants in this family discovered that
the smells coming from these pits actually came from foods
that they found highly palatable. They then went back to the
same spot each time they passed that way to try to find more
of the new foods. Lor a year or so they did not appear to
make special trips to the garbage but checked it out when

183

184

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

they were in the area. Then in 1975 the Amboseli Lodge
built an elephant feeding station just beyond the swimming
pool and delivered wheelbarrows full of vegetable and fruit
refuse from the kitchen. The TA and TB families, and even
some other families, took to the feeding station almost
immediately. The other groups visited it if they happened to
be going that way, but the Ts soon began to make several
trips to the feeding station each day, actually moving out of
Longinye in the middle of the day to go to the Lodge. By
1976 the TA family was very familiar with the smells of
human food and started being attracted to the same odors
in the campsites.
At the end of 1976 the matriarch of the TA family, Torn
Ear, was killed by poachers outside the Park, and the loss of
her leadership allowed her daughter Tuskless free rein in
determining the movements of her group. Tania of the
closely bonded TB family did not appear to influence
Tuskless even though she was much older. With the loss of
Torn Ear the situation went from bad to worse. Tuskless
and Teddy started raiding camps far more frequently. The
family did leave the Park for the wet season migrations in
1977 but was back at the Lodge as soon as the dry season
began.
Later in 1977 the feeding of the elephants at the Lodge was
stopped at the order of the Ministry, but, unfortunately, the
garbage from the kitchens continued to be placed in a
shallow depression which the elephants had no trouble
reaching. They simply concentrated on the garbage pits and
camps once the feeding station was taken down.
I made various recommendations, the first and most impor¬
tant being that the garbage areas be made elephant-proof with
deep vertical-sided pits and that the refuse in these pits be
burned every day. I also advised trying to educate the campers,
telling them about the situation and asking them to help by
locking all their food away in vehicles at night. I further
suggested that once the garbage was out of reach, the elephants
in the campsites be chased away by the rangers with thunder
flashes. I concluded:

ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE

The most important thing is that when the elephants return
to the Park [after the next wet-season migrations] there be
no garbage accessible to them. If they get even a small
amount of garbage it will act as a positive reward for coming
back and searching in that area. The positive reward is the
key to how an animal searches for food and moves through
its habitat. I believe that Tuskless and Teddy can reform
with strong negative conditioning, that is, creating a situa¬
tion where they associate bad experiences with trying to raid
a camp. An important thing to remember is that these
elephants do not need garbage to survive. An elephant eats
approximately 300 lbs. of food each day. I estimate that
Tuskless, who gets the most, does not eat more than 20 lbs.
of garbage per day on a good day. This is less than 10% of
her diet. There is no necessity to eat garbage, but they find
it rich and palatable and so they go out of their way to seek
it out.
I do not recommend killing Tuskless until these other
measures have been tried first. In any case the death of
Tuskless will not solve the basic problem. Other elephants
from the same family may continue to raid, and inevitably
other families will learn about garbage as well, and then
members of those families will have to be shot. In the
meantime the chance of a tourist being killed grows greater
each day.

My report was accepted with appreciation and at least one of
the measures was taken. Signs were put up in the campsites
telling people to lock their food away in their vehicles, and the
situation did improve for a while. However, the garbage
situation, if anything, became worse. One problem for the
parks administrators was that Ol Tukai, the area that encom¬
passed the lodges and the self-help bandas, was not actual parks
land but belonged to the local county council. Therefore, the
parks personnel could only suggest that something be done
about the garbage but they could not implement any changes
themselves.
By 1981 the problem with the elephants was acute. Whereas
once the lodges were trying to lure elephants in closer for the

185

186

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

tourists to see, they were now distressed by the damage the
elephants were doing. The elephants fed on the trees and
plants around the lodge; they continually broke through a
fence and got into the kitchen compound; and one dark night
an extremely drunk lodge employee who was walking back
from the canteen lurched straight into an elephant and got
tusked through the side. Miraculously the elephant did not try
to finish him off and the tusk missed any vital parts. He was
back at work within two months.
I still do not know who tusked the man; possibly Tania or a
more recent member of the garbage brigade, M76; obviously it
was not Tuskless. What I find amazing is that no one had been
hurt earlier. Over the years Tuskless and the others had had
every opportunity to injure or kill tourists and lodge and parks
employees, not to speak of researchers. And they had every
provocation. Every day in the camps and around the bandas
and lodges these elephants were shouted and run at, had things
thrown at them, even had people come right up and hit them
with sticks or brooms. All the elephant had to do was swing its
trunk and the person would be dead. Elephants are incompre¬
hensibly strong. In and around Amboseli they kill Maasai cows
from time to time. They do not do it by knocking a cow over
and tusking it; they just kill the cow (an animal weighing up to
1,000 pounds) with one swipe of the trunk. Think what that
would do to a 150-pound man.
And yet during every single incident I have witnessed (and
over those years there were many), Tuskless and the others
went out of their way to avoid hurting a person. At times it was
actually difficult not to step on or run over someone but they
always swerved or backed quickly to avoid doing so. Sometimes
these encounters could be amusing, although only after they
were over. At the lodge with the feeding station, the manager
had ordered a single line of painted white rocks placed along
the periphery of the lawn. The feeding station was only about
fifteen yards beyond. A sign was put up forbidding anyone to
walk across the line. So being good, obedient tourists, as soon as
the elephants came they picked up their cameras and ran out as
far as the rocks. For some reason that I find difficult to fathom
they thought they were perfectly safe behind the rocks, which
were no more than eight inches high. The elephants sometimes

ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE

found the tourists irritating, and Tania showed definite signs
that she disapproved of the people standing there shouting and
laughing. She would often give a sharp toss of her head or a
short charge, which would send the tourists running and
screaming toward the lodge. Her son Taabu was the worst
offender. Being a young male on the verge of independence,
he was full of high spirits and mischief. He would come walking
over from the garbage pit to the feeding station with a
particular jaunty gait that I recognized meant trouble. He
would often carry a plastic or burlap bag he had found in the
pit and then stand in front of his audience and whip the bag
back and forth, up and down, over his head, onto his back, in
between his legs, before finally flinging it in the air. Sometimes
he would put his head down and charge the people; and lo and
behold, he could actually run over the rocks.
One day Tania lost her temper and came charging at a
hapless woman tourist who ran back toward the lodge, but fell
halfway across the lawn. Tania, only a few feet behind her,
skidded to a halt and towered above her. She backed up,
turned, and ambled across the rocks and rejoined her family.
She could have easily killed the woman, but for whatever
reason she did not want to and had to use a substantial amount
of energy to avoid doing so. (She left deep skid marks in the
ground.) Every day this family had encounters with people and
yet with the exception of the drunken room steward no one had
been touched.
The lodge management finally realized that they had a
serious problem on their hands. After they took down the
feeding station, leaving only a water hole out beyond the line of
rocks, an independent businessman was brought in to build an
“elephant-proof’ fence around the garbage pit. First he built
one of railway ties, stout posts, and thick cable. The elephants
literally walked through it. He tried a different design and they
walked through that as well. Finally he got thicker posts, thicker
cable, and cemented the heavy railway ties deep into the
ground. He was positive that this was an elephant-proof fence.
The day came to close it up. The lodge manager and other staff
came to watch, and the fence builder had his camera ready.
Tuskless and Tania and the others arrived at their usual time to
feed at the garbage pit. They stopped when they saw the fence,

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

reached their trunks out, smelling, stood for a bit, and then
Tuskless went forward. She lifted her foot, placed it on a taut
cable, pressed down, and a corner post came right out of the
ground. She pushed the fence over and walked in. The others
quickly joined her. Tuskless was only in her late teens at the
time, and probably weighed no more than 5,000 pounds. It is
wonderful to think what a big adult male weighing 12,000
pounds could have done. The businessman gave up for a while
after that. Eventually he tried electric fencing, which proved to
be far more successful.
I cannot help but love and admire Tuskless. She is smart and
brave, inventive and gutsy, and at the same time she has to be
one of the sweetest-natured animals I have ever known. I can
never become deeply angry with her, regardless of how badly
she and the others sometimes behave. I enjoy having them right
in the camp, even right next to my tent, as long as they are
feeding on grass or palms. The TAs and TBs over the years
have become our camp companions. They are still wild animals
but we accept each other and we do have some understanding
of what is allowed and what is not.
Fortunately, for the elephants, for my study, for the parks
authorities and the lodge staff, no other family units became
garbage raiders. The TCs and TDs and the EAs and EBs
sometimes went to the feeding station, but once that was taken
down they did not seek the garbage pits or the camps. All the
other elephants in the population fed on natural vegetation and
moved through the park according to normal foraging pat¬
terns. Only two males from other families, M76 and M82,
turned to garbage. M82 was placid but M76 could be very nasty
at times and very persistent.
It was M76 who began to try to open up cars to get at the food
inside. Irate campers would arrive at Warden Bob Oguya’s
(Bob replaced Joe Kioko in 1978) office door in the morning to
show him crumpled car trunks, dented doors, and broken
windows. Bob dispatched rangers to the campsites and they
bred over the heads of the elephants or threw thunder flashes
at them, but this had virtually no effect. After a while even I
thought it was time to consider shooting M76. He was very
different from Tuskless and I thought he would hurt or kill
someone.

ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE

A solution to the campsite problem came in a roundabout
way. When Amboseli had been made into a national park, it was
agreed that the public campsite should be placed just outside
the park on a Maasai group ranch. In this way the Maasai could
reap some of the benefits of tourism by collecting the camping
fees. However, the Maasai elders, who were very conservative
people, were suspicious of this plan, thinking it was a way for
the park to take more of their land away. It took the younger,
educated Maasai officers of the group ranch a long time to
convince them the ranch would make money from the scheme.
The elders finally agreed; and after another long delay in
deciding where it should be (the elders did not want it where
there were any trees because then they would not be able to
bring their goats in to feed on the acacia pods), they cleared an
area in the Acacia tortilis woodland on the southwest border of
the park, built some latrines and a small house for an attendant,
and in June 1982 declared the public campsite open.
The parks authorities very kindly allowed my research camp
to stay where it was, but all the public campsites near us were
closed down. With no easy prey around, I was a little worried
that Tuskless might make a concerted effort to raid my camp,
but this did not occur. She did not move to the new campsite
either. It was way out of her dry-season home range and in any
case she still had the garbage pits near the lodges. Thus the
campsite problem was solved, but the behavior of the TAs, TBs,
M76, and M82 in Ol Tukai continued to be troublesome.
In the meantime my camp was left in relative peace. It was
delightfully quiet and calm without the other campers nearby.
Even when the campers were there, it had always been an oasis
in dry, dusty Amboseli, a cool and relaxing place to come back
to after a hot day in the held. Next to the elephants them¬
selves, the camp is the thing that makes me most happy in the
work I do.
I chose the place for the camp in August 1975. The area was
well behind the other campsites. To enter it one took a
circuitous route through a stand of Acacia xanthophloea trees and
around clumps of Phoenix reclinata palms. Coming around the
last clump of palms one emerged into a large clearing covered
in thick Cynodon dactylon grass, fringed on the western and
eastern sides by more palms and acacia trees. In the center of

190

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

the glade, three huge, old, yellow-barked acacia trees shaded
nearly the whole area. To the north was another glade, also
ringed with acacias and palms, and to the south was a long
green meadow at the bottom of which were more large trees
and above which rose Kilimanjaro in all her majesty. It was, and
continues to be after eleven years, a sight to make my heart
soar.
When I received a grant from the African Wildlife Founda¬
tion in 1975 to continue my study, I considered the various
possibilities for accommodation in Amboseli. During the parttime study I had stayed at either Jonah’s house or the Ol Tukai
bandas. Jonah’s house was not available because he was going to
be spending more time in Amboseli himself; and the bandas
did not appeal to me because they were in a busy, populated
area. I wanted to set up a permanent camp in the park. I had
already spent some time on my own in Amboseli and was not
worried about living by myself, despite the fact that another
woman researcher, Melanie Fuller, had been killed (probably
by a lion; it was never satisfactorily determined) in Amboseli
two years before. In fact, in 1974 I experimented with loneli¬
ness and with the possible “ghosts” of my friend Melanie by
spending two weeks at Jonah’s house with no one else in the
park I even knew. It was lonely and I could not get out to work
often because it was the height of the rains and I could not
drive off, or even on, most of the roads in my little Renault 4.
The death of Melanie, who had also stayed in Jonah’s house,
did not haunt me or deter me, although I found it very
disturbing and sad.
I spent that time in Amboseli working on the book I was
writing and on the elephant recognition hies and family struc¬
tures. I fed crumbs to the birds and talked to them; and one
night after I had been there for ten days without speaking to
anyone except the gas pump attendant, I had a vivid dream
that an open car drove up to the house, and sitting in the
passenger seat was a wooden, talking dummy. I was immensely
pleased and completely satisfied to be getting a dummy. It
seemed to be all I wanted.
I do not know if the dream proved I could live by myself or
not. In any case, as it turned out, I have rarely lived in Amboseli
on my own. At the same time that I wanted to set up a camp in

ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE

Amboseli, a Ph.D. student from Colorado State University,
Wesley Henry, was starting a study on tourist impact and
behavior. Wes was a tall, bespectacled, very serious young man
who seemed good-natured and competent in the bush. I am not
sure what he thought about me, but we decided to join forces
and set up a camp together. He liked the site I had chosen and
on September 12, 1975, we pitched our tents.
The camp evolved over the years. We started out with two
tents: Wes’s big (10 X 16) two-room canvas Eureka tent and my
medium-sized (10 X 10) locally made canvas tent. We put Wes’s
tent under the three big trees in the middle of the glade. Wes
used one of the rooms of his tent as a bedroom/study area and
the other side was used jointly by us as a kitchen and dining
room. My tent, placed under another tree at the southern end
of our clearing facing the mountain, was my combined bed¬
room and study. It contained a small metal camp bed, a table
and chair used as a desk, a cupboard for clothes, and various
wooden boxes for storing things. Wes’s vehicle was a VW
camper in which he also stored his clothes and research
materials.
Wes contributed a refrigerator from his camper and I
contributed a two-burner stove (both ran off a gas cylinder), a
round dining table with four traditional canvas and wooden
camp chairs, and a large sisal carpet. Wes turned out to be quite
a good cook, and he also liked building things and working
around the camp. His first project was a shower, which was
ingeniously designed. A 44-gallon drum was placed over a fire
to heat the water. Into the drum were welded a pipe with a
faucet and a pressure valve. A hose was attached to the pipe
and run up to a shower bucket, which was suspended from a
wooden frame built over a large hole in the ground covered
with wooden planking. Once the water was heated by firewood,
the pressure built up in the drum. Further pressure was added
through the valve with a foot pump. When the pressure
reached a certain point the hot water would rise through the
hose and into the shower bucket. In the early days we just had
a bit of burlap around a frame for privacy. Later we built a
more substantial shower stall with sisal poles.
There was already a “long drop” latrine in the camp, nicely
placed far away from the tents in a clump of palms. However,

191

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

it was in a terrible state of disrepair and basically consisted of a
large, deep hole with a few rotten wooden beams precariously
suspended across the top. The superstructure had fallen down
years before. Using the choo, which is the Kiswahili word for
toilet, was probably the most adventurous thing that we had to
undertake in that hrst month. Attempting to balance on a
crumbling beam while holding a few palm fronds in front of
one for privacy and trying not to think of the consequences of
the beam breaking was a feature of the camp I was happy to
dispense with as soon as possible. The rebuilding of the choo
was one of our hrst priorities and we sent to Ol Tukai for some
fundis. They erected a new outhouse and strengthened the
floor but we were still left with the old beams, and it was not
until 1978 that we put in a cement floor.
We had not done so earlier because, being in the park, we
were not supposed to build any permanent structures. The
camp was to remain easily dismantled and moved without
leaving anything behind. We totally agreed with this policy and
always tried to comply with it. The advent, several years later,
of the cement floor in the choo came about because one day the
warden in charge of works came to have tea with Phyllis and me
and at some point asked to use our choo. He came back looking
a bit shaken and said it was dangerous using the choo with
beams like that. The very next day he sent his men over with a
bag of cement. After that we had a beautiful choo, which we
were inordinately proud of and which we could send our guests
to without worrying whether they were going to come back.
Wes and I did all our own cooking, washing, and cleaning the
first month, but we always planned to get a camp worker/cook
to guard the camp and to do most of the time-consuming
chores, leaving us free for our field research. Old East Africa
hands have various theories about how to find a reliable
employee. Some feel that it is best to bring in from the outside
someone who has good references; others feel that it is better to
ask someone working in the same place to recommend a friend
or relative. I tend toward the latter theory, because I think it is
nice for the new person to have at least one friend in the area
and I reckon that someone with a good job is not going to
jeopardize that job by recommending a person he cannot trust.
I went to see the warden of Amboseli, Joe Kioko, and his

ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE

American-born wife, Christina. They had moved to Amboseli
the year before and had become good friends of mine. They
were always warm, hospitable, and extremely helpful and
contributed significantly to making my first years in Amboseli
happy and secure.
They had a very pleasant older man working for them,
Maundu, who was of the Kamba tribe, which traditionally
provided most of the gun bearers, trackers, cooks, and camp
workers for hunting safari companies. We asked him if he knew
of anyone who could cook and clean and wash and iron clothes,
and, most important, was willing to live in the bush surrounded
by large, dangerous wild animals. He said there was someone
near his home who had worked as a camp cook and was
presently out of a job. I gave Maundu some money to go home
that weekend to see if he could bring the man back. His home
was about 75 miles away, near the intriguingly named town of
Sultan Hamud.
On Monday Wes and I stopped by the Kiokos house to see if
Maundu had had any success. He was somewhat disappointed
because the man he had had in mind had only a few days before
found work and was off on a safari. He told me that he had
brought back another man who had worked as a cook some
years before. Did we want to meet him? We said all right and he
went off to his quarters and a few minutes later came back
followed by a tiny, decidedly evil-looking old man who glowered
at us with only one eye. We exchanged the usual formal
greetings and then he handed us an ancient piece of paper with
yellow edges. It was a letter of “recommendation” from a
previous employer dated 1954! According to the letter Masaku
Sila had worked as a sort of kitchen toto, or assistant to the
main-house servant/cook, for what sounded like a very colonial
memsahib in Mombasa. It was not much of a recommendation
because the woman, and I could almost hear her strident voice,
wrote something like “This boy is trustworthy but needs
supervision and does not work well on his own.”
Masaku explained that after working for the family in
Mombasa he was employed by the Kenya Railways as a manual
laborer for 20 years before retiring. He did not like retirement
and wanted to go back to work. At the time I met him he was
probably about 55 years old. He did not know the date of his

193

194

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

birth but thought it was around 1921. Wes and I went off and
conferred with Christina. Masaku was not exactly what we had
in mind. He certainly had no experience in the bush, he
probably did not know how to cook, and he was fairly scarylooking, but he was there and Maundu was recommending
him. We decided to hire him on a trial basis.
That was the beginning of a long, intense, sometimes joyful,
often turbulent, always caring relationship between Masaku
and me. Masaku took to camp life immediately. He handled the
wild-animal visitors with great aplomb and apparently very
little fear, but with enough respect not to get hurt. He was a
natural cook. He remembered some things from his days in
Mombasa, particularly fish, and chips, which he made better
than anyone else I knew. Wes and I both taught him other
recipes, but by the second time he made a dish it was always
better than the original dish that we had shown him. We bought
an ammunition tin for use as an oven, and a cook from another
research camp showed him only once how to make bread. This
man’s bread was hard and dense, but he was the only one
around who could teach Masaku how to bake bread under
camp conditions. From that day on Masaku made delicious,
light fluffy bread, never anything like the other cook’s. Soon we
were having rich stews, piquant spaghetti sauces, spicy chilis,
and hot curries cooked in a pressure cooker; roast chickens,
rolled beef, and legs of lamb with garlic and rosemary cooked
in the ammunition tin; plus simpler fare such as steaks and
chops with various kinds of vegetables and potatoes.
We got permission from Joe Kioko to build a kitchen,
assuring him that it could be taken down fairly easily. Masaku
and Wes built it in a matter of days. As I mentioned earlier, the
kitchen consisted of strong corner beams, sisal poles, chicken
wire, and roofing felt, with a door made of wooden planks. The
floor was hard-packed dirt. It just so happened that I had lived
on a sisal plantation before moving to Amboseli. When a sisal
plant flowers it sends up a long pole from which the flowers
sprout. Afterward the whole plant dies and the pole dries and
hardens. The poles vary in height and diameter but an average
pole is about ten feet long and has a diameter of about three
inches. I learned that they could be used for all sorts of things.
Masaku was also a whirlwind of activity around the camp:

ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE

sweeping out and dusting the tents, making beds, chopping
hrewood, heating water for our showers, and washing and
ironing clothes, which he did very well with a charcoal iron (a
skill to this day I find amazing; I cannot understand why the
clothes do not get scorched by the iron and burned by sparks).
Masaku was never a shy, shadowy figure working quietly in
the background. He was always very much a presence in the
camp and his whole personality put a particular stamp on the
place. He worked amazingly hard, and contrary to what his
former employer wrote, he needed virtually no supervision.
However, Masaku did need special care and attention. It was
not obvious at first, in fact not even in the first year or two, but
Masaku was subject to radical shifts of mood. I am not a
psychiatrist or psychologist but from what I have read I would
venture to guess that Masaku was a classic manic-depressive.
During his highs he would dance and skip around the camp
and sing old Kamba folk songs in a high, beautiful falsetto. He
would clean everything with frantic intensity and want to start
new projects such as painting the posts for the clothesline,
which we preferred unpainted. Sometimes when we were out in
the field, the new projects would get done before we had time
to stop him.
In his lows, he was very quiet and his face changed com¬
pletely, becoming blacker, with all lines turned down. He could
barely speak and when he did it was usually mumbling to
himself in the kitchen. Nothing was right during these times:
The hrewood was the wrong kind, the potatoes we brought
from Nairobi were watery, the fish came in pieces that were so
small that he could not even cook them, his joints ached, and he
could not lift things. He often had to retire to his tent and rest.
He was inconsolable and there was little we could do. During
the lows the camp took on an atmosphere of gloom and we
found ourselves practically whispering and tiptoeing around.
I learned how to deal with Masaku’s highs and lows but
sometimes they got to me and I would lose my patience
(occasionally I thought the highs were worse than the lows); yet
over the years we grew to love and respect each other. It was
not as easy for the other people who later lived in the camp. As
far as Masaku was concerned, Wes and I could do no wrong
and every subsequent person who came to live in the camp

195

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

never quite measured up to us. Some people handled it better
than others. I sympathized with all of them. It must have been
annoying in the extreme to be told every time one tried to do
something in the camp, “But Cynthia and Wes didn’t do it that
way.” It did not help that Masaku spoke only Kiswahili and
most new people were just learning the language. But Masaku
at his best was superb—smart, canny, funny, hardworking,
totally reliable, totally trustworthy, loyal to me in a way that I
will probably never experience again, and basically a kind and
good man. At least some of these qualities were apparent to
everyone who lived there, but Masaku could definitely drive
some people to distraction.
Wes stayed in the camp for two years, leaving in July 1977 to
complete his Ph.D. He eventually joined the U.S. Department
of the Interior, but has come back to Kenya on short visits from
time to time. (Once someone has lived in Africa it is hard to
leave for good.) I stayed on my own for several months and
briefly had a young assistant who lived at the camp with me,
Joan Riback. Joan’s most important legacy was to teach me
backgammon. We had many a good game after dinner by
candlelight. Even on my own I was not lonely in Amboseli.
There was a community of researchers, and parks, lodge, and
county-council employees. Long-term baboon and vervet
projects each had at least one researcher based in Amboseli.
The baboon project had a permanent house in Ol Tukai and
the vervet researchers rented a banda. Jonah himself came
from time to time and usually had a student working for him
and living at his house. There were also researchers studying
archaeology and paleontology who either rented bandas or
camped. Two University of Nairobi students doing their mas¬
ter’s degrees camped next to us and were excellent neighbors.
At times there were over ten people in the field. The research¬
ers, together with lodge managers, wardens, and others work¬
ing in the park, had dinner at each other’s camps and houses,
met for drinks at the lodges, organized going-away parties for
people leaving, and generally helped each other whenever
possible.
In 1978, when I was still alone in the camp, Phyllis joined the
vervet project, planning to rent a banda for the duration of her
study. However, she was not happy there and I invited her to

ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE

stay with me. We shared the camp very happily for two years.
When Phyllis left in 1980, Joyce, who had been working in
Amboseli for short periods since 1976, returned to start her
Ph.D. research on the elephant bulls. Shortly after, Robert
Seyfarth and Dorothy Cheney, a married couple who are the
directors of the vervet project, decided to give up the bandas
and move to the camp as well. A few months later a good friend
of Joyce’s, Cynthia Jensen, a plant ecologist, came to work with
Jonah and also put up a tent in the camp. Robert and Dorothy
(who returned in subsequent years) stayed for about a year
until their new student, Sandy Andelman, arrived in 1981.
Thus, in 1981, Joyce (elephants), Cynthia (grasslands), Sandy
(vervets), and I lived in the camp. Having two Cynthias did not
cause too many problems. For some reason known only to
Masaku, he called Cynthia Jensen “Sin Sing,” so there was no
confusion for him. From 1978 on we had a second person
working with Masaku, hrst his nephew, who had the charming
and apt name of Boniface, and later Masaku’s brother,
Mwanga. The camp was busy, productive, and a very pleasant
place to live.
In January 1981 I finished the focal sampling on the calves I
had been following and planned to get back to analysis and
writing. I did not intend to spend as much time in Amboseli as
I had previously. In November 1980, I, along with two other
friends, had rented a house in Nairobi where I hoped to work
without the distraction of the elephants. In Amboseli I found it
very hard to stick to my desk when I knew elephants were out
there doing interesting things. I was reluctant to give up my
time there, but in January 1981 an event occurred that forced
the end of a particular era for me in Amboseli.
I had a cat in Amboseli, a sweet but rather eccentric gray
male named “Moshi,” which is Kiswahili for smoke. When I was
about to move to Amboseli I tried to hnd a home for him with
no success and so ended up, with much trepidation, taking him
to Amboseli. I thought he might run away or get eaten or
trampled by any one of the many animals that lived in and
around the camp. It is theoretically against park regulations to
have a domestic animal in a national park, but Amboseli was not
run as a park when I Hrst went there. Aside from several
thousand cattle, sheep, and goats, there were 200 to 300

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

hundred cats in Ol Tukai around the two lodges and bandas,
and some wandered as far as the campsites. I did not feel that
one more cat was going to make a great deal of difference and
I planned to keep him there only until the other cats were
removed. (The cats were never totally eliminated and eventu¬
ally the parks gave permission for some cats to remain in order
to keep the rat population down.) In any case, my cat was a
neutered tom who could not mate with any wild cats, he had
had all his shots, and what was more he was a hopeless hunter
so he was not going to have any effect on the bird population.
However, Moshi adapted to camp life with remarkable ease
and was happier in Amboseli than in any other place he had
ever lived. He stayed in the camp and, being a cat, slept most of
the time anyway. He had his little routines, one of which was
“hunting” every evening between 6:00 and 7:30 p.m. Moshi’s
idea of hunting was to sit beside the tree stump next to my tent
and hope a mouse would jump into his mouth. In the five years
he was there I think he caught only two mice. One year we had
a literal plague of rats. It was a year of high rainfall and the rat
population exploded. The Maasai began to contract bubonic
plague and 20 people died before it was brought under control
by preventive drugs. Rats were everywhere. Whenever I
stopped the Land-Rover I could hear them rustling about. On
some days Masaku caught seven or eight rats in the kitchen,
sometimes two in the one trap. Moshi ate them all and soon
became so conditioned that as soon as he heard the trap spring
shut he would run to the kitchen.
Moshi seemed fairly oblivious to the dangers of living with
wild animals. He had a few close encounters, one with a huge
male baboon that got into my tent. There was a tremendous
commotion in the tent and Masaku and I ran over to find the
baboon leaving. Moshi was clearly frightened. I think the
baboon had gone into the tent to look for food but found Moshi
instead. Baboons do kill and eat small mammals and I think this
one would have killed Moshi. Fortunately, he never came back.
On another occasion a very large black mamba, over ten feet
long, came sliding around the base of my tent and was about to
come to the open entrance when I threw my shoe at the side of
the tent. Moshi leapt off the bed to investigate. I grabbed him
just as he was going out. I backed to the far side of the tent,

ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE

waited a minute or so, went back to the front, looked out, and
there was the mamba with its head raised waiting to strike. That
is what I do not like about mambas—they refuse to run away
like any other law-abiding snake. I called for Masaku and
Boniface and they came running with sticks, and the snake
slithered off into the palms. To this day I still shudder at the
thought of what would have happened if the mamba had come
into the tent or if Moshi had managed to get out before I
caught him.
In the end it was a leopard that ended Moshi’s stay in the
camp. I had been thinking about taking Moshi to Nairobi once
I began renting the house, although I knew he would be
happier in Amboseli. I decided to delay making a decision until
after I went to the States in February 1981 for a meeting of the
New York Zoological Society. I was in Amboseli in January,
finishing up my sampling before I left. A few days before I
arrived for this stay Cynthia Jensen had discovered a leopard in
the camp just after dark. The leopard had seen Moshi in his
usual hunting spot next to my tent and had begun to stalk him
when it was disturbed by Cynthia and a visitor. I was not happy
to hear this story when I got there because leopards are
notorious killers of domestic dogs and cats. I was worried that
once the leopard knew Moshi was there it would keep coming
back to try to get him. Unfortunately, I was right.
The night I arrived, January 14, I went to bed as usual with
the tent door firmly zipped down and Moshi inside with me.
Sometime in the middle of the night I woke up suddenly
because Moshi had leapt off the bed with a loud thump. I sat up
to see a leopard moving from the window right next to my bed
around to the front of the tent. It was bright moonlight, and
because I could see what the leopard was doing I was not afraid.
I said something like “Go away!” It saw me and quickly slunk
down the path to the choo. I went back to sleep almost
immediately and woke as usual at dawn. It was not until I sat up
in bed that I noticed that the window next to my bed had been
ripped wide open. I think what must have happened is that the
leopard came up to the tent looking for the cat; and Moshi,
seeing the leopard, must have sat up or even moved to the
window. At this point the leopard took a swipe at him and
ripped through the screening, and Moshi leapt off the bed. The

199

200

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

sound of the screen ripping must have woken me but I only
registered the sound of Moshi jumping to the floor.
The ripped window forced my decision. I stayed in Amboseli
for another week, keeping very careful watch over Moshi in the
evenings and not sleeping all that soundly at night, and then
took him with me to Nairobi. As I write this today Moshi is close
to 16 years old, in excellent health, if nearly stone deaf, more
than a little senile, and as eccentric as ever.
The rest of 1981 was relatively uneventful in terms of both
camp life and the elephants. I got back from the United States
in early March and went down to Amboseli soon after. I saw the
T families many times over the next months. On March 23 I
noted that Tara had developed small breasts and thus I knew
that she was pregnant. On June 20 the TAs and TBs came and
fed around the camp for about an hour and little Tuo, who was
already learning bad tricks from his mother, came under the
makuti (thatching) roof over my tent and drank the water out of
my washbowl. Tuo was becoming a specialist at feeding just
under the roofs of the tents, where greener grass grew because
of the drip-off. The older elephants could not fit under the
shelters but Tuo could, and since he had absolutely no fear,
that became his niche in the camp. (A few years later he was still
trying to get under the roofs to feed but he was much too big
and he tended to have a devastating effect on the structures.)
On August 20 I found Teresia in estrus, which surprised me.
I thought there would be more of a gap between the death of
her calf and the resumption of estrus in a female of her age, or
I thought she might not resume cycling at all. On that day M7,
a one-tusked male, whom we named after Masaku, tried to
mount her, but was unsuccessful. The next day Teresia was in
consort with another male, Pablo.
Throughout 1981 I watched the gradual independence of
Teddy. Some days he was with his family, other days he was
with one or two young males, and on yet other days he was at
the periphery of different families. By midyear he was spend¬
ing less than half his time with his own family and I considered
him independent. Teddy was 15 in 1981, which was actually a
bit late for a male to leave. The average age of full indepen¬
dence is 14. Some males leave as early as nine years old, while
others are real Mama’s boys and stay until 19. Igor, in the IA

ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE

family, was still closely following his mother, Isabel, when he
was 18 and only became independent because she died. Albert
finally left the A As and his mother, Amy, when he was 19.
There seem to be many factors involved in the timing of a
young male’s independence. The behavior of the females in a
male s family may influence when he leaves. Some females are
more tolerant of young males than others. Whether a male’s
mother is alive or not may also play a part in his departure.
Then, too, a male’s own character is probably an important
factor; some males are less dependent and more adventurous
from the time they are young calves. Gomer, of the GB family,
was only nine years old when he began to go independent and
yet his mother, Gloria, was alive and was the matriarch of the
family.
Later in 1981 I began to see Right Fang away from his family
and I sometimes found the TCs without him. He was 11 at the
time, which seems to be the average age to start going indepen¬
dent. On the other hand, Tim, who was a year older than Right
Fang and whose mother, Trista, had died several years before,
showed no signs of leaving his family unit.
Thus, by the end of 1981, the only change in the number and
composition of the four T families was the departure of Teddy.
I did not consider Right Fang independent yet, but thought he
would probably leave sometime in the next year or two.

201

*

/

Flexibility
1982

T

he TC and TD families had migrated away from the
swamps during the wet season of 1982 but had not gone far.
By June they were back in their dry-season home range. In
July and August, along with much of the rest of the
population, they spent a great deal of time to the south of the
park in the Balanites and Acacia nubica woodland, feeding on
the remaining grass and small trees. When that area was no
longer rewarding they returned to the swamps and woodlands
within the park, but there Teresia and Slit Ear found more
elephants than usual and less food to go around. The “long
rains” of 1982 had proved to be lower than average and the
number of central elephants had grown through both births
and immigration. There were more elephants concentrated in
and around the two major swamps—Longinye and Enkongo
Narok—than there had been in many years, perhaps ever
before.
The TAs and TBs stuck close to the lodges and supplemented
their diet with food from the rubbish pits. But Teresia and Slit

205

206

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

Ear used a different strategy to avoid the competition within
the park.
In the early hours of one morning in late August Teresia
decided to leave the park and seek forage elsewhere. The two
families had spent the night in Olodo Are, to the east of
Longinye, but instead of waking up and moving slowly toward
the swamp, the group members stood around in some disarray.
Teresia faced east, rumbling gently. Some of the others were
facing west but they turned and went over to Teresia when she
called to them. Soon all the family members were facing east
and with a decisive slide-flap of her ears, Teresia started off.
The two families walked east for about three miles without
stopping to feed. Just before dawn they crossed the park
boundary and passed a series of Maasai wells used for watering
cattle. It was too early for the Maasai to be at the wells; they
were barely stirring in their nearby thorn enclosures. The
group walked on and eventually hit a dry water course which
was the tip end of the westerly drainage of the Namalog swamp.
Teresia, who was nearing 60 years old, had been coming to this
swamp in the dry season from the time she was a young calf. It
had never been the center of her family’s home range, but her
grandmother and her mother had led her there for four or five
days of feeding at least once during each dry season. The
vegetation was similar to that in the swamps within Amboseli
Park but there were differences, including some tasty bushes
and grasses which did not grow in either Longinye or Enkongo
Narok.
When Teresia had come with her grandmother and mother,
and even in recent years as matriarch herself, Namalog was just
another swamp in the series of swamps at the northern base of
Kilimanjaro. There had been no more Maasai at Namalog than
anywhere else, although it was a particular favorite of the
Maasai because the water at its source was considered fresh,
clear, and unsalty. Namalog means “sweet place” in Maa.
On this day in August 1982 Teresia and the others walked
along the dry course of the swamp among large Acacia xanthophloea trees until they reached the main area of wet swamp,
which was deep and thick with papyrus and other reeds. They
skirted the deep part, heading along the northern edge for an
area where the grass was usually good. Teresia deliberately

FLEXIBILITY

kept to the northern side of the swamp because a few years
before she had led her and Slit Ear’s families to the springs at
the south end of the swamp only to find fences and channels
and smells of vegetation with which she was unfamiliar. She
would have investigated further but there had been the hated
sounds and smells of humans, cattle, sheep, goats, donkeys, and
dogs. The unusual mix of odors had disturbed the elephants,
and they had retreated.
Since that day, on all of their forays to Namalog they kept to
the northern side or the western end of the drainage. In these
areas they found only Maasai herding their cattle, and with
discretion they were able to avoid direct confrontations. So on
this day Teresia confidently led her group along the edge of the
swamp in the safety of the thick groves of acacia trees. They
had gone about halfway along the main deep swamp when
Teresia suddenly stopped and lifted her trunk to smell the
breeze. The wind was coming from the east so they were
walking into it. Up ahead Teresia could smell people and
domestic animals and a very unpleasant odor of vegetation that
she had never smelled before. She gave a sharp shake of her
head in a gesture of elephantine displeasure. The smells were
coming from the area she had planned to feed in.
Teresia turned around and started back along the swamp
and then led her family into the deep water and across to an
island in the middle. Here they were able to feed without being
disturbed. Over the next days, through smells and sounds, they
learned where the Maasai were and how they were moving with
their cattle. By retreating into the park at times and feeding at
the swamp edges only at night, and in the deep swamps and on
the islands in the daytime, the TCs and TDs were able to avoid
the Maasai and use Namalog almost as their own private
swamp. It was definitely more dangerous than the park swamps
but at the same time there was more food at Namalog. Breaking
their traditional dry-season pattern, they stayed in the east for
over two months.
I “lost” the TCs and TDs for almost five months during 1982.
I had seen them on June 2, 1982, and then I did not see them
again until October 25, 1982. I started to get very worried
about them by the end of September because of all the families

207

208

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

they were two of the most central and usually fairly predictable
in their ranging and movements during the dry season. In fact,
by the beginning of 1982, of all 48 families in the population,
the TDs were the ones that I had sighted most often during the
course of the study—over 300 times.
I had expected not to see them in August. That was the time
I always referred to as the elephant s “French holidays. (In
France government offices and industries are closed down for
the month of August and everyone takes a holiday at the same
time.) It took me several years to realize that there was a
definite pattern of the elephants disappearing in August. They
would come back from the wet-season migrations in June, stick
around for most of June and July, and then vanish in August.
It was puzzling why they left again because there was no rain in
those months and they still needed the swamps for drinking.
Eventually I discovered that they were spending their time to
the south in the Balanites and nubica woodlands, feeding on
these trees and other vegetation, and presumably coming into
the park to drink at night. By mid-September the majority of
the central elephants were usually back in the park concentrat¬
ing around Longinye and Enkongo Narok, where they stayed
until the short rains came in November.
When Slit Ear and Teresia did not come back in September,
I could not imagine where they were. I did not think they were
all dead because usually only one or two elephants in a family
die or are killed and then one finds the remnant of the group.
In this case I had not seen any of them. During most of the
months they were “missing” I was the only one on the elephant
project so I thought it was possible they were around but that I
was not running into them. I began going out and deliberately
searching for them, but had no luck.
Keith had finished his master’s degree at the University of
British Columbia and had arrived in Kenya in June to start
a new study on the feeding behavior of the Amboseli ele¬
phants for a Ph.D. at Cambridge University. Unfortunately,
because of a particularly bad bout of bureaucratic red tape he
was not able to get his research clearance until September.
When he finally received permission to begin, I asked him to
keep his eye out for the TCs and TDs. Keith saw them briefly

FLEXIBILITY

on. October 13. They were way over at the eastern border of
the park. Keith had been to Namalog to ask the Maasai if
the elephants were still using that swamp and they told him
that one group had been there for several weeks. Circum¬
stantial evidence suggested that it was Slit Ear and Teresia’s
families.
Keith and I were concerned about the situation at Namalog.
The Maasai had begun to plant crops using the water from the
swamp for irrigation. While they were pastoralists the Maasai
were tolerant of wildlife, but we knew that as soon as they
became agriculturalists they would come into direct and acute
conflict with the elephants and other herbivores. At that time
the Maasai were mainly planting onions, which so far the
elephants did not seem to like, but they were planning to plant
maize, cabbages, and beans and it was only a matter of time
before the wildlife discovered these delicious crops.
I finally saw the TCs and TDs on October 25, and I believe
this was the day they actually came back to central Amboseli. I
found the two families coming in from the east to the northern
edge of Longinye. Everyone was there except Tia, Tio, and
Right Fang. Tad, Tia’s 1976 calf, was with the group and I
found that worrisome, because if Tia had temporarily gone off
on her own Tad should have been with her. I was pleased,
however, to see there were two new additions. Tara and
Theodora each had new calves, both males. When I had seen
the families on June 6, I had noted that Tara and Theo had
three-quarter-sized breasts. I had predicted that they would
give birth within the next couple of months. From the calves’
sizes and levels of coordination, I estimated that Theo’s had
been born in July and Tara’s in August. Earlier in the year, on
January 27, I had recorded another new calf in the TC family.
Tess had given birth to a female and I was glad to see that this
calf was still alive and appeared healthy. Tess, at 19 years old,
had her first surviving calf.
I was concerned about Tia, but the whole family seemed
relaxed as they strolled in slowly and placidly. The only
indication that they might have had some trouble while
they were away was a new slit cut in Slit Ear’s lower left ear. I
drew it:

209

210

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

The slit, which began in the inner part of the ear, was
unmistakably the size and shape of a Maasai spear. It must have
hit her ear as she stood facing or charging a Maasai. There was
no sign of a spear wound on her neck or shoulder behind the
ear so she must have had her ears spread. I thought that Tia
might not have been as lucky. However, the very next day I
found the TCs and TDs and there was Tia with Tio and Right
Fang. Thus, it seemed as if Teresia and Slit Ear’s strategy had
been a successful one. All the family members were alive and
looked in fair condition, and the three calves born to the two
families that year were doing well.
I must admit that it surprised me that the TCs and TDs
would change their dry-season ranging pattern so drastically. I
had come to expect a certain regularity in elephant behavior
and I would never have predicted that these two families
would leave the central Amboseli swamps for most of the dry
season. But 1982 turned out to be a year when the whole
question of elephant flexibility, both social and ecological,
became of particular interest to me. I was doing much less
field work and instead was sitting down and analyzing some of
my data. One of the things to emerge was the intriguing ability
of elephants to change their behavior under various ecological
conditions. The second thing to draw my attention was an
overall change in the migratory patterns of the elephants in
the previous five years. This change, which was also being
investigated by Jonah and Keith, posed some ecological and
park-management questions.
Even before I began to analyze my data I realized how easy
it was to come to some perfectly reasonable, but inaccurate,
conclusions after watching a population of elephants for one or
two years. It was very tempting to superimpose a firm structure
to one’s observations of social organization and ranging pat¬
terns and fit it all into a neat package. As I explained in the

FLEXIBILITY

earlier chapters, the first part of my study covered a period of
drought. At the time I was not aware of how serious the
drought was or what a profound effect it was having on the
elephants. During the part-time study from 1972-75 I was
getting to know the elephants individually and working out
who belonged to what family, what their ranges were, and how
they were using the habitat. By the end of 1976, when I had
been living in the park for over a year, I felt fairly confident
that I understood the basic behavior and ecology of the
Amboseli elephants. I was wrong. I did understand some of it,
but after a year of good rainfall in 1977, I realized that I had
only been observing the elephants under one set of conditions
and that their behavior could change quite radically under
another set.
In looking at my data on elephant social organization in 1982
I saw that creating a diagram such as the one I presented in
Chapter V, however helpful, did not really reflect the immense
flexibility within the elephant social system. The degree of
stability of family units is one of the features of the system that
reveals this inherent flexibility. The subject has even been the
focus of a friendly controversy. When Iain Douglas-Hamilton
did his study in Manyara he found that family units were
remarkably stable in composition. When he came across Flor¬
ence s family, all ten members would always be there. It was the
same with Rhea’s family or Leonora’s or any of the other
well-known families in the population. In his four-and-a-halfyear study he saw one young female separated from her family
for nearly a week and a gradual breaking off of the subgroup
of five that I mentioned earlier, but these were the only
exceptions in the daily records of family-unit composition.
Sometimes two or more families would join together and
coordinate their activities. These were usually members of a
single bond group. Occasionally loose aggregations of up to 100
elephants would form and move through an area feeding. But
when the aggregation broke down, the same animals would
always remain in the same families.
The results of an extensive radio-tracking study carried out
in Zimbabwe by Rowan Martin called into question Iain’s
description of the degree of family-unit stability. Martin found

211

212

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

that a female was rarely in a group of the same size or
composition and that the most consistently stable association
was between a female and her youngest offspring. At the same
time that Martin was carrying out his study in Zimbabwe, I was
getting similar results in Amboseli. Family-unit composition in
Amboseli was far less predictable than the way I had remem¬
bered it to be in Manyara.
Fortunately, it turned out to be a case of no one being
“wrong” but of elephants behaving differently under differing
ecological conditions. In the early days of wildlife research
many of the scientists were inflexible. If someone studied a
species in one place and someone else got incompatible results
in another place, it caused all sorts of anger and backbiting. It
was almost as though each researcher thought his or her study
animals displayed the Platonic ideal of the species’ social
behavior and thus anything that contradicted his or her de¬
scription had to be wrong. Primates in particular seemed to
generate controversy. (Elephants generate intense controversy
as well but not in the behavioral field as much as in the
ecological: The mere mention of elephants and trees is usually
enough to start a raging battle among wildlife biologists.)
Gradually, as more and more results came in from a variety of
places and habitats, scientists were forced to give up their
entrenched positions. They soon became fascinated with the
differences among populations and what they meant in terms
of adaptive significance. Now the topic is very fashionable.
My analysis of family-unit composition and groupings over
time in Amboseli showed that there was a great deal of variation
among families and also within a family under differing cir¬
cumstances. First of all, membership in a family unit did not
necessarily mean that an individual would always be present in
the family or that the family would always have the same
composition every time it was sighted. Stability of composition
varied from family to family with some tending toward fission
within the family and others tending toward fusion with other
families.
Taking the TC family as an example once again, my analysis
indicated that Slit Ear’s family was very stable in that all
members were together in the great majority of sightings, but
even this family was found in different group sizes on nearly a

FLEXIBILITY

daily basis. As I said earlier, the TCs were with the TDs in over
80 percent of my sightings of them. In the. two-year period
1980—82, before the births of new calves, they were often in a
group of 16 animals, made up of 10 TCs and 6 TDs, but there
were sometimes 1 or 2 young males with them and sometimes
older males as well. On other days they might have joined
Tania and Tuskless, adding eight more animals to the group
plus whatever young males may have been tagging along with
the TAs and TBs. At the same time Teddy was nearing
independence and was sometimes present, sometimes not.
Males of Teddy s age tend to come and go during the year or
so before leaving their family for good, and their presence or
absence changes the size and composition of the group from
sighting to sighting. Then, too, the TCs occasionally joined
other families in feeding aggregations.
Thus, one day Slit Ear might have been in a group of ten
consisting of just her family, the next sighting she might have
been in a group of 16 consisting of her family plus Teresia’s,
the next in a group of 26 including the TAs and TBs and two
young males, the next she may have been in a group of six,
having split with Tia for a brief time, and then very next
sighting she may have been in an aggregation of 130. If one
had been radio-tracking her from the air or stations on top of
hills, these kinds of data would have presented a confusing
picture. On the ground with Slit Ear and knowing all the other
individuals (which they did not know in Zimbabwe), I could see
what was happening. Slit Ear’s family unit itself was stable, her
splits with Tia were very rare, and when she aggregated with
other families her own family was almost invariably intact.
Some other families in Amboseli were not as stable as the TCs
and it was interesting to try to figure out why they might not
have been. I looked at the records of the 24 best-known families
in the Amboseli population. Eighteen of these families were
fairly stable, with all the members found together in over 70
percent of their sightings. The six remaining families, whose
members were found all together in less than 70 percent of
their sightings, appeared to be unstable for a variety of reasons.
I will briefly describe each of these less stable families in
descending order of cohesiveness to try to illustrate some of the
probable causes.

213

214

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

In 1982 the FAs’ matriarch, Filippa, died, leaving two adult
females, two juvenile females, and three calves. For nearly a
year afterward the family was split in three. The two adult
females, Fiona and Fifi, formed separate mother/offspring
units and the juvenile females sometimes moved on their own,
sometimes with one or the other of the two females, and
sometimes with other families. Prior to Filippa’s death the FA
family was one of the most stable. In this case the loss of the
matriarch appeared to have a disintegrating effect on the
family. Without her leadership and the strong bonds the other
females had with her, the family split. After a year Fiona and
Fifi began to spend more time together again but the family still
had more of a tendency to divide than it did before.
As I described in Chapter V, the largest family unit in the
population, the PA family, with 29 members in 1982, gradually
split into two units of 16 and 13. By the end of 1982 they were
considered separate families, with the two largest and oldest
females, Penelope and Phoebe, each leading one subunit. The
size of the family unit appeared to be the cause of the split in
this situation. I would guess that beyond a certain number the
loss of feeding efficiency outweighs the social benefits of living
in a large family.
The LA family lost an unnamed adult female in 1975. Two
young females, Louise and Libby, who were the putative off¬
spring of this female, often split from the other members and
moved as a separate group. I assumed that their relationship
with the matriarch, Lillian, was not a close one, but I was always
puzzled by the split because not only did Louise and Libby go off
but so did an adolescent female, Lee, who I was fairly certain was
the daughter of Lillian. Perhaps as a small calf Lee had been
taken care of by Louise, the older offspring of the dead female,
and had built up a stronger bond with her than with her own
mother. The bonds between the two younger animals did not
surprise me, but a daughter leaving her mother did.
The KA family’s matriarch and another adult female died in
1975, and there were members in the unit whose relationship
was uncertain. Some may have been offspring of the two dead
females, but others may have been immigrants from families
who had lost all their adult females. I knew of one family whose
two adult females were killed on the same day, leaving no one

FLEXIBILITY

215

older than ten years. It was in the early days of the study and I
had not yet photographed the youngsters, and therefore did
not know what happened to them. I think in a situation such as
this they would have tried to join a family within their bond
group. In any case, floaters,” as I came to call these presumed
orphans, never seemed to establish quite as strong bonds as
they would within their own families and they tended to join
and leave their adopted family for unpredictable periods.
The FB family also contained individuals who were floaters,
and bonds among the members in general did not seem as
strong as in the other families. One reason for this may have
been the character of the matriarch, Freda, who is irritable,
possibly because of a physical ailment—she has constant open
sores on one side of her body. She often goes off on her own
with just her youngest calf.
The DB family has always refused to fit into any neat
definition of a family unit. I have often wished I could just
ignore them when doing analyses. The DBs may not even be
one family and they certainly have never been cohesive. In
1975 the “family” consisted of seven animals: two large adult
females, two young females, one immature female, one firstyear calf, and a pubertal male. In the next three years the two
young females and the calf died and the pubertal male became
independent, leaving only three members of the family: Delia,
Deborah, and Daisy. Even then the levels of association of these
three individuals were not high. Then, on November 15, 1978,
Delia, one of the large adult females, had the first calf born to
the Amboseli population after a 16-month period of no births.
From that day the QB family, a peripheral family which
previously had rarely associated with the DBs, began to spend
time with Delia and the calf. At first Delia and the other large
DB female, Deborah, were intolerant of the QB females, and
often threatened them and chased them. The QB females,
however, initiated greeting ceremonies whenever they ap¬
proached the DB females, until the DBs began to respond by
greeting in return. Eventually a close relationship built up
between Delia and the matriarch of the QBs, Quilla. Deborah
and Daisy remained more aloof.
By the end of 1982, Quilla and her offspring were spending
most of their time with Delia and her offspring, and the rest of
I

216

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

the QB family had resumed their previous distribution and
association patterns. Deborah and Daisy were more frequently
on their own or with the DAs, members of the same bond
group, than with Delia and Quilla, and I considered that the
DB family had broken into two. As I write this in 1986 I am still
not sure what has happened. Quilla continues to spend a great
deal of time with Delia but goes off on her own or joins up with
the other QBs from time to time. Because there is evidence
indicating that the central elephants have better forage avail¬
able to them in the dry season, it makes sense on one level for
Quilla to try to insinuate herself into a central family. However,
where does that leave all the advantages of living in a group
of related females in a system that evolved over thousands of
years? Whether Quilla will become a permanent member of
Delia’s unit is yet to be seen. If she does it will be the first
recording in Amboseli of a female leaving her own family and
permanently joining another.
In each of these six cases there seems to be a different
combination of factors accounting for the lack of family stabil¬
ity: the death of a matriarch, the size of the family, the strength
of the bonds among the members, the presence of floaters in
the family, the physical condition of an important member, and
the attempted immigration of a stranger. And there are prob¬
ably many more things of which I am unaware.
So far I have pointed out possible social reasons for lack of
stability in some family units, but perhaps more important and
more prevalent are ecological reasons. As the long-term study
progressed, it became obvious that the cohesiveness of families
was greatly affected by environmental conditions. Once again I
appreciated the value of several years of data. I was able to
compare association patterns within families and among fami¬
lies under varying conditions. I chose 1976 and 1979 as
contrasting years, the former a year of severe drought and the
latter of higher-than-average rainfall.
The most obvious contrast for anyone even superficially
watching Amboseli’s elephants in those two years was the
difference in the size of cow/calf groups that one encountered.
A “group” was defined as any number of elephants moving
together in a coordinated manner, ranging from one (ex¬
tremely rare) to hundreds, consisting of females and calves or

FLEXIBILITY

females, calves, and adult bulls. (All-bull groups were analyzed
separately.) In 1976 group size was small, averaging only 15.1,
while in 1979 it was 45.9. The distribution of group sizes in
those two years was even more revealing. In 1976, 86 percent of
the groups sighted consisted of fewer than 25 animals and only
one group of over 100 was seen. In 1979 only 60 percent of the
groups numbered under 25, and 16 percent consisted of large
aggregations of over 100 elephants, many of which were over
200 and 300.
In Amboseli what appears to happen is that elephants will get
into big groups when environmental conditions permit. In
1979 seventeen inches of rain fell following two years of high
rainfall (average is about 12 to 13 inches) and as a result there
was abundant, widespread, and evenly distributed vegetation.
Under conditions such as these elephants can move and feed
together, all getting basically the same food with little or no
competition among them. One day I recorded a group of 550
elephants: It consisted of 47 family units and well over 50
independent bulls.
In 1976 only seven inches of rain fell after several years of
average to lower-than-average rainfall. As a result, food re¬
sources were scarce. Since elephants had to search for and pick
and choose their food from among patches of grass, bushes,
trees, and swamp vegetation, it appeared to be more efficient to
forage in small groups. The elephants spread themselves
throughout the park and surrounding areas, with each family
returning to its clan’s dry-season home range and tending to
move on its own. During the severe drought months of 1976
even some of the family units broke down, with a single female
and one or two of her offspring forming a subunit. It appeared
that younger females or females less closely bonded to the
matriarch were often the ones who split, such as the LA family’s
little subgroup.
In Chapter II, I already described one set of circumstances
that could cause fission—the birth of a calf. However, the
ecological conditions prevailing at the time seem to be an
important factor in determining whether a new mother stays in
her family or not. I looked at the differences in this behavior
between 1976 and 1979. Out of 21 females who gave birth in
the 24 well-known families in 1976, 12 (57 percent) left their

217

218

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

families for periods ranging from a few days to two months. In
contrast, in 1979 very few females split from their families.
Only five new mothers out of 57 (9 percent) separated from
their families that year and four of these for only a day or
less.
Fusions of families also occur. Temporary unions take place
frequently, depending on environmental conditions. During
the wet years, 1977-81, some of the bond groups remained in
large extended families for long periods. The TAs and TBs
were nearly always together as were the TCs and TDs. If I had
first recorded the TCs and TDs in 1977 I would probably have
considered them one family, but in the early years I had seen
them as separate units often enough to decide they were two
distinct families.
Permanent fusions may also happen. From the beginning of
the study, the BB family made up a bond group with the UA
family, but their association levels were not particularly high
until 1977. In 1976 they spent only about 25 percent of their
time together, but they still spent more time with each other
than with any other families in the population. In 1975 four of
the UA family members (including the matriarch) died, leaving
only three members. Once the drought ended the UAs’ three
remaining females gradually began to spend more and more
time with the larger BB family. By 1979 the BB and UA
families associated with each other over 80 percent of the time.
This level was as high as some of the individual female-female
associations within families, and at that time I considered that
they had fused.
After a virulent pneumonia-like disease swept through the
Lake Manyara elephant population killing over 100 animals,
Rick Weyerhaeuser, working under Iain’s direction, recorded
two cases of fusions of remnant families. He also noted that
during and after the 1976 drought and the period of diseaserelated mortalities, some family units broke down, splitting into
as many as three subunits. Thus both fission and fusion were
recorded in the one other elephant population that was well
known.
I think it is fairly easy to understand the environmental
pressures that cause aggregations to break down and even
family units to split up from time to time, but what I am not

FLEXIBILITY

confident about is why elephants get into large groups at all.
Just because they can do it is not a good enough explanation. It
has been suggested that elephants move in large herds when
they have been disturbed by poaching or other harassment.
One theory is that when an elephant population is heavily
poached, the old matriarchs are killed because they have the
biggest tusks, with the result that the leaderless family units get
together and mill about, not knowing what to do. A simpler
theory is that an individual is less likely to be killed in a big
group by mathematical probability alone, and thus those ele¬
phants that tended to mass together in times of danger survived
and passed on this herding behavior. I have been to areas
where elephants were under intense poaching pressure; on one
recent occasion I saw a group of over 300 elephants at the
height of the dry season. Although they were immediately
undisturbed and were moving slowly, they were bunched very
tightly together, forming a huge gray wall of elephant hide.
Poaching was reported to be rampant in that park, and I had no
doubt that this large aggregation had formed in response to
predation.
In Amboseli, herds of over 60 are rare in the dry season. And
when the big aggregations form during the wet season, they are
usually loose and somewhat formless, with spaces between
individuals and subgroups. In the years when I saw the biggest
groups in Amboseli there was no poaching and a minimum of
spearing and thus the families were not losing their matriarchs
or being harassed. In Amboseli there had to be another reason
for the formation of large aggregations.
I can only suggest that there are probably many factors that
attract elephants to one another. Elephants are very social
animals. The 650 elephants in Amboseli all know one another;
in their fluid social system, where they all move about the
ecosystem, sometimes together, sometimes apart, relationships
of some sort must be established between individuals and
families. Thus the big aggregations may provide an opportunity
for reestablishing social relationships, whether they be affiliative bonds or dominance positions. I noted a high rate of
interaction among the members of the aggregations especially
in the first year that they formed. There were frequent
greetings, friendly investigations, play bouts, threats, confron-

219

220

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

tations, pokes in the backside, and chases. Young males who
had not yet left their families were the most active, taking every
opportunity to meet other male calves in order to spar and test
each other’s strength. This sparring as youngsters is no doubt
important in determining dominance rank in adulthood.
Large herds may also form for breeding purposes. The
aggregations attract adult males, particularly males in musth.
At the same time the social stimulation of a big group may bring
females into estrus. In a large group an estrous female would
have many more males to choose from and she would be more
likely to find a musth male to go into consort with. In 1977 and
1978 large aggregations were frequent and during those two
years 60 percent of the females conceived.
And finally, elephants are intelligent, complex animals who
may simply enjoy the social stimulation of a great gathering of
relatives, friends, acquaintances, and members of the opposite
sex. I think this stimulation may be the proximate cause for
getting together, with the ultimate causes relating to individual
reproductive success.
Their social flexibility makes elephants particularly fascinat¬
ing to study. After 14 years with the Amboseli elephants I still
feel a sense of excitement when I head out of camp in the
morning. I can never predict what I am going to see, and in all
my years in Amboseli, I have never once been bored when I
have been out with the elephants. One of them will always do
something or be somewhere or be with someone that perplexes
me. The combinations, recombinations, offshoots, splinters,
breakups, and just the general mix-up of individuals are
endlessly intriguing.
At about the same time that I was looking at my data on
family-unit cohesiveness and flexibility, Jonah and Keith were
analyzing grouping and ranging patterns of the Amboseli
elephants using data collected from Jonah’s aerial counts and
Keith’s, Jonah’s, and Harvey’s radio-tracking records. They
eventually wrote a joint paper called “Seasonal herd dynamics
of a savanna elephant population” for the African Journal of
Ecology.
They too found that group size changed according to the
season, with large groups forming during the wet months and
small groups during the dry months. They also showed that

FLEXIBILITY

during the rains the elephants ranged much farther than in the
dry months. The elephants left the Amboseli basin shortly after
the rains began and returned when water supplies ran out in
the bushlands. In the dry season the radio-collared animals
were always found within ten miles of the Amboseli basin while
during the rains they might be up to 25 miles away. The
elephants tended to use the bushed grassland outside the park
when there was available water and abundant forage. As the
dry season progressed, they moved successively to the open
woodlands, the denser woodlands, the swamp edges, and
finally into the swamps themselves. The quality of the forage in
these habitats went from high in the bushed grassland down to
the lowest level in the swamps. At the end of the dry season the
elephants had to trade quality in the form of high-protein
grasses, herbs, and shrubs, which are seasonal, for quantity in
the form of low-quality but abundant swamp vegetation.
This pattern of leaving the basin during the rains and
returning through the various habitats in the dry season was
fairly consistent up until 1977. Then, being elephants and
therefore not predictable, they changed their seasonal migra¬
tions. Once the good rains of 1977 came, the elephants tended
to stay in the basin more and more. In the wet years of 1977—81
they were found in the basin in both wet and dry months,
whereas in the dry years of 1973-76 the majority of the
elephants migrated out in the wet season. The tendency to
remain in the area of the park meant that there was a greater
impact on the vegetation year-round, and it was suggested that
this impact could lead to a so-called elephant problem, in which
people perceive a conflict between elephants and their habitats.
For the time being, the big question was why they changed their
behavior.
Jonah, Keith, and I have suggested a variety of answers to the
question, but none of us can be sure of any of them. The most
obvious change that occurred in Amboseli in 1977 was the
removal of the Maasai and their livestock from the 150 square
miles designated as national park. As I explained in Chapter II
alternate water sources plus other facilities were provided for
the Maasai in exchange for their giving up the central basin.
The other notable change was the substantially improved
environmental condition of the park after the breaking of the

221

222

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

drought in early 1977. There was plenty of grassy forage
available for the elephants and they may have decided it was
not worth the effort to move away from the basin. At the same
time their decision may have been influenced by the poaching
that had occurred on their wet-season migrations in the mid¬
seventies. Possibly they avoided going to the areas where
elephants had been shot, once they had the choice. In the dry
years they had to migrate in order to find nutritious food, but
in the wet years there was sufficient forage “at home,” with the
added benefit of no Maasai livestock competing for it.
I personally feel that the change in the migratory patterns of
the elephants was influenced less by the availability of vegeta¬
tion than by the new distribution of the Maasai people. Having
spent thousands of hours with the Amboseli elephants, I know
that what they fear most is the Maasai. The elephants will panic
and run when they see or smell them at a distance of over half
a mile. Before 1977 Maasai were everywhere throughout the
elephants’ range; but after the park was created there was an
area where the chances of meeting them were relatively lower.
I say “relatively lower” because the Maasai still came into the
park under a variety of circumstances (when the water pipeline
or boreholes were not working; in dry years when there was
little or no forage left outside), although they were not allowed
to set up their enkangs (thorn enclosures with houses inside) in
the park.
But as I keep saying, once one decides that elephants are
doing something for one reason or another they do something
totally unexpected and counter to one’s theory. By going to
Namalog, where there were many Maasai in the dry season of
1982, Slit Ear and Teresia acted contrary to my theories, and
yet what they did may actually have been a clever strategy since
the benefits of fewer elephant competitors appeared to out¬
weigh the costs of meeting Maasai.
Once they got back to Amboseli after the short rains had
begun in the third week of October, they did not stay in their
normal dry-season home range for long. In November, for
several days in a row, they came from the ridge above the basin
into the northwestern end of the Enkongo Narok swamp, an
area I had seen them in only one or two times before. During
that month Tia, along with Tio, Tad, and Right Fang, broke off

FLEXIBILITY

from Slit Ear and stayed around the Longinye swamp. This
fission in the TC family was also unusual, but Tia must have
had her reasons.
During 1982 I noted some other events and milestones in the
Ts’ lives. Right Fang continued to show signs of going inde¬
pendent and Tim was finally seen away from his family for the
first time in the beginning of that year and on several occasions
again before the TCs and TDs “disappeared.” The day I found
them coming back into Amboseli Tim was not with them and I
did not see him with his family on the remaining sightings in
1982. It appeared that Tim had become independent very
quickly once he left the family for the first time. This behavior
was in contrast to that of both Teddy and Right Fang, who
came and went for a long time before finally becoming inde¬
pendent. In fact Right Fang was still with his family more often
than not in 1982, so by the end of that year I did not yet
consider him independent.
During 1982 I was watching the calves who had been born in
1980 to see when their tusks would begin to show beyond the
lip. It was part of the study of calf development. To know the
age of tusk eruption was helpful in formulating an aging
technique for scientists working on elephant populations in
which birth dates were not known. In Amboseli, somewhere
around two and a quarter years old seems to be about the
average age for tusks to emerge. In males, the tips appear
earlier.
On March 31, 1982, I could see the tips of Tuo’s tusks
showing. He was 21 months old. I was particularly interested in
this record because I had wondered if Tuo would inherit
tusklessness from his mother. In Asia, probably through selec¬
tive hunting for ivory, female elephants only rarely have tusks,
and males sometimes have tusks and sometimes do not. In
Africa most elephants have tusks: Tusklessness is extremely
rare in males and not common in females. In Amboseli less
than 2 percent of the population is tuskless and all are females;
about 3 percent are one-tusked and about half of these are
male. Tusklessness usually runs in families, such as in Big
Tuskless’s family, with (in 1982) three tuskless females and two
one-tuskers; and in Gloria’s family, with two tuskless females
and two one-tuskers.

223

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

Estella’s twins provided a convenient example of the differ¬
ence in tusk development between male and female calves. I
noted that Equinox, the male twin, had tusks on October 26. A
month later his sister Eclipse showed just the very tips of her
tusks, while Equinox’s tusks already protruded at least a
quarter of an inch beyond the lip. I estimated that Equinox’s
tusks must have erupted at about two years and two or three
months old, whereas his sister’s did not erupt until she was two
years and five months. They were both a bit late compared to
other calves of their respective sexes, but then both twins had
all along been small for their age.
On November 19 I found the TAs and TBs in Longinye,
together with a few independent young males including Tim.
Tonie, the female who had stood over and protected her dead
baby from lions two years before, was there with a newborn,
healthy male calf. I was pleased for her and quite impressed
with how quickly she had bred again. The first birth occurred
in November 1980. Joyce had recorded Tonie in estrus on
February 10, 1981, only three months later, and this must have
been when she had conceived her new calf.
There remained only two young adult females in the T
families who had not yet had calves: Tilly and Tamar. I was
watching their breast development. During 1982 they had both
gone from being completely flat-chested to having small
rounded breasts about one quarter the size of a lactating
female’s. Neither Tilly nor Tamar had been seen in estrus, but
it is easy to miss an estrous period that lasts only four to six
days. Judging by the size of their breasts, I suspected they
would have their calves sometimes in mid-1983, which meant
that they had conceived in the latter half of 1981.
I was eager to gather data on Tilly and Tamar’s reproductive
activity because they were nearly positively known-aged ani¬
mals. I had met them when they were both under three years
old in 1973 and I was able to place their ages confidently to
within a year. I estimated Tilly to have been born in 1970 and
Tamar in 1971. Thus, in 1981, when I suspected that they had
conceived, Tilly was 11 years old and Tamar was 10. I wanted
to know at what age females reached sexual maturity and
started to cycle, at what age they first conceived, and at what age
they first gave birth. If my calculations were correct, Tilly

FLEXIBILITY

would be 13 when she had her first calf and Tamar would be
only 12.
The last months of 1982 were busy and exciting ones for the
elephant project, the camp, and me. As I mentioned earlier,
Keith returned in June to start the research for his Ph.D. on
feeding behavior of elephants. Phyllis came back in July to
begin work on maternal behavior and calf development. Keith’s
research clearance came through in September and Phyllis’s in
October and they were both raring to go. Keith already knew
many of the animals from his previous study but Phyllis had to
start from scratch. They spent those first months becoming
acquainted with the elephants, taking new photographs, updat¬
ing the recognition hies, and working out their sampling
techniques. They were very keen to contribute to the long-term
records both in providing data and in devising hling systems. In
this way and many others they were extremely helpful to me
and I was very happy to have them on the project.
I had been working on my own for more than a year after
Joyce had left in July 1981. I missed her companionship, of
course, but what I missed most was someone to talk to about the
elephants, someone who knew them personally as I did. Every
evening when Joyce and I had returned from our held work we
would immediately discuss which elephants we had seen, where
they were, whom they were with, and what they were doing.
Now I had two other people out in the held and each evening
when we all got back it was like a great gossip session. “You’ll
never believe where I saw Jezebel, and guess who she was with!”
“Lolita came into estrus today; she seems much too young, and
all the dinky little bulls were chasing her nonstop.” “Ml54 has
just come into musth and he was testing all the females in the
PA family.” “I just missed seeing a birth today. Odile was with
a tiny shaky baby and she still had blood on her legs.” “Oh, did
you get the sex?” “Yes, it’s a female.”
With Phyllis and Keith in the held I felt less reluctant about
starting my new role in the project. The Kenya government
had decided that there should not be more than two expatriate
researchers working on a wildlife project at one time. I wanted
both Keith and Phyllis to do their studies: The feeding study
was a top priority and it was a perfect time for the continuation
of the calf-development study since we were expecting another

225

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

baby boom in 1983. I knew that what I had to do was write up
my results to date, and so I decided to give up my research
permission to make way for Keith and Phyllis. At the same time
Joyce agreed to delay a study on communication that she
wanted to do. She had completed her Ph.D. in October 1982,
having set a record at the Sub-Department of Animal Behav¬
iour at Cambridge for the shortest time taken to obtain a Ph.D.
degree. But more important, her thesis was considered an
excellent piece of work by all concerned.
My new role was to act as director or really coordinator of the
project. I was concerned with keeping the project and the
research camp going and collecting and organizing the long¬
term data on births, deaths, estrus, musth, group size, and
ranging and association patterns. The Wildlife Department
and the Office of the President, which grants research permis¬
sion, agreed to this function and allowed me to continue to
spend time in Amboseli to supervise and confer with my
colleagues. It was a good solution, but a part of me was very sad
to give up the more intensive research.
My plan was to buy a computer and spend additional time in
Nairobi. Both Keith and Phyllis were living in the camp. The
romance that had been budding back in 1979 when they had
been in Amboseli had flowered, and before 1982 was over they
decided to get married. (They had a delightful wedding in
March 1983 in Tsavo National Park, at the house of our good
friends Joe and Christina Kioko. Joe, who had been warden of
Amboseli from 1974-78, had since been transferred to Tsavo.)
So 1982 ended on a good note for the project and for the
elephants. Despite the dry year there had been very few deaths.
Only ten elephants had died: eight calves and two adult
females. The Ts had done very well. With the new births and
the departure of Tim, the T families consisted of the following
26 animals:

ta

Tuskless (62)
Tuo (80)

9
S

Tonie (67)
C’82

9
8

Tilly (70)

9

FLEXIBILITY
tb

Tania (44)
Tom (79)
Toby (73)

9
d
d

tc

Slit Ear (36)
Slo (80)
Tabitha
Tamar (71)
Tara (67)
C’82
Tess (63)
C’82

9
9
9
9
9
cJ
9
9

Tia (50)
Tio (80)
Taddeus (76)
Right Fang (70)

9
6
d
d
■

td

Teresia (22)
Tolstoy (71)
Theodora (67)
C’82

9
d
9
6

Tallulah (63)
Tao (80)

9
9

i

227

Clh&pfesif IX

Population Dynamics
/'

1983

Three new babies had been born in the T families by June
1983. Tania gave birth in April and Slit Ear and Tia had calves
in May, once again synchronized in their reproduction. These
new calves did not cause quite the excitement that Tom, Tao,
Tio, Slo, and Tuo had in 1979 and 1980. When the ’83 calves
arrived there were already nine calves under four years old in
the bond group and only one adolescent female to shower the
usual intense attention on the newborns. Slit Ear’s eight-yearold daugher, Tabitha, spent as much of her time as possible
close to Slit Ear’s and Tia’s calves, touching them frequently
with her trunk, and pulling one or the other in under her chin
to protect it. She always stood patiently whenever one of them
wanted to suckle from her flat, milkless breasts.
Slo and Tio, the 1980 calves of Slit Ear and Tia, did not
welcome the arrival of their siblings. Their mothers refused to
suckle them any longer. Slo and Tio were only just over three
years old, which was relatively young to give up milk, and the
weaning process was difficult for them. Slo gave in to the

231

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

inevitable but Tio kept attempting to suckle. He would try by
following close behind Tia and hooking his trunk around her
hind leg in a calf s signal for its mother to stop. If she stopped
he would then go forward to her teat and if she was cooperative
she would stretch the leg on his side forward so he could easily
reach her breast. If she did not stop or was uncooperative in
standing, which she had been ever since the new calf was born,
he would scream in protest. In the past she had always given in
to him when he had a tantrum, but now she would not.
Sometimes when the baby was suckling he would try to sneak
onto the other teat, and once in a while Tia would tolerate him,
but within a few weeks he gave up trying. Fortunately, it was the
height of the rainy season and there was sweet new grass in
abundance, providing Slo and Tio with an adequate diet. In the
meantime, Tom, who was closer to four years old when Tania
had her new calf, made the transition far more easily. He had
always been such an independent, outgoing calf that he did not
seem to mind the arrival of the baby.
Two of the young females in the Ts, who were usually very
attentive to new calves, barely acknowledged the ’83 babies.
Tilly and Tamar were noticeably bulging, heavy and slow, and
their breasts were now over three quarters the size and fullness
of those of lactating females. Tamar, who was just 12 years old,
appeared to be the one more encumbered by her pregnancy.
She stopped and rested frequently and lagged behind her
group.
On the evening of June 20, 1983, the TCs and TDs were
feeding in the consimilis to the east of Longinye, getting ready to
move out to the ridges beyond Olodo Are to feed at night while
there were no Maasai at large. Tamar had been showing signs
of restlessness and agitation. Like Tallulah, she stopped and
backed and knelt down and also stretched her front legs
forward and rocked back and forth. She appeared to be in
considerable discomfort. She lay down, got up, knelt on her
back legs, circled, and stretched over and over again, but no
bulge appeared beneath her tail.
At 7:00 p.m., when the last light was fading in the western sky,
the elephants formed a single group, and after a few rumbles
were exchanged they set off to cross the open pan. Tamar did
not follow them. The two families had walked about 300 yards

POPULATION DYNAMICS

when Slit Ear, with her C’83, stopped, turned back slightly, and
rumbled. Tamar answered. Slit Ear rumbled again but Tamar
remained quiet. The others were continuing on across the pan
and Slit Ear began walking to catch up with them. She went
another 100 yards and stopped again. Once more she rumbled
and Tamar answered. Slit Ear turned around, facing the
consimilis. She lifted and swung her right foot back and forth,
and rumbled a louder sound. There was no answer from
Tamar, but Tara and her C’82 plus Tabitha and Slo broke off
from the others and turned and came back to Slit Ear. When
they arrived where Slit Ear was still standing, they greeted her
with flaps of their ears and the rich greeting rumble. They then
all walked back to Tamar.
Tamar was lying on her side breathing hard. Slit Ear felt her
with her trunk and then poked her hard with a tusk. Tamar
struggled up onto her feet and immediately started backing
and stretching and kneeling. Slit Ear, Tara, and the others,
except the baby, began feeding on the new shoots of consimilis
at the base of the large clumps. Slit Ear left Tamar alone as long
as she did not lie down. Whenever she did, Slit Ear came over
and forced her to stand up.
This behavior went on for over two hours and still no bulge
appeared. Tamar began to lie down more frequently and when
Slit Ear made her get up she stood with her head low and
swayed unsteadily from side to side. She no longer moved
about in an agitated manner. Finally, around 10:00 p.m., with a
gush of blood a bulge appeared below Tamar’s tail. Now she
knelt and stretched and strained and at 10:15 the calf was
expelled onto the ground. Only bits of the fetal sac still clung to
it. It was covered in blood. Tamar stood swaying on shaky legs
while Slit Ear and Tara tried to get the baby to its feet. They
nudged it and attempted to lift it with the aid of their feet and
trunks, but to no avail. The baby barely struggled at all and
soon stopped moving. After a few more minutes it died.
Blood continued to flow steadily from Tamar’s vulva, form¬
ing a pool between and around her hind feet. She began to
quiver all over and then sank onto her knees and head. Slit Ear
and Tara raced over to her to prop her up. They managed to
get her up onto her feet again and with one on each side of her
they kept her up for several more minutes, but once again she

233

234

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

fell forward onto her forehead and tusks, and this time they
could not get her to stand again. She fell sideways and lay
quietly with just her trunk bending and turning. Slit Ear got
behind Tamar and wedged her tusks under her shoulder, as
Teresia had done with Tina, and lifted, but there was almost no
response from Tamar, only a brief movement of her feet and
trunk. Slit Ear tried to lift her three more times but then gave
up and stood over her, with her trunk touching Tamar’s head.
Tara and Tabitha also stayed close to Tamar, touching her
from time to time with a foot or trunk. Slit Ear’s C’83 nestled in
beside her mother and Slo waited at Slit Ear’s tail, leaning
against her but with her ears lifted and tense in confusion and
fear.
It took Tamar a long time to die, but her mother and sisters
did not leave her until well after she had stopped breathing.
Very slowly they moved away from her, heading in the direction
Teresia had taken, but they stopped often, turning their heads
slightly back and rumbling. They got no answer from Tamar.
After they had covered about three quarters of a mile, they
halted once again and rumbled, and this time they got an
answer from Teresia and Tia up on the ridge. Slit Ear, Tara,
and Tabitha all raised their heads and rumbled a louder, more
resonant sound and with a new eagerness to their gait they
walked on to join the rest of their family and bond group.
Births and deaths are the main data points of interest to
zoologists who are interested in population dynamics, which is
the study of what a particular dehned number of animals, or
human beings, for that matter, is doing, has done, and will do
in terms of rates of growth or decline or the reaching of some
sort of stability. It is the cumulative effect of individual births
and deaths, age of maturation, intervals between births, num¬
ber of years of fertility, immigration, emigration, and so forth,
on the size of populations. The topic often seems cold and dry,
full of bare facts and figures when viewed in the abstract, but it
is an essential one in understanding the ecology and behavior
of a species.
Tamar’s death and the birth and death of her calf were what
my colleagues and I came to call “demographic events” when
we were trying not to be emotionally affected by the death of an

POPULATION DYNAMICS

elephant we had known well. Whenever I arrived in Amboseli
after a stint of writing in Nairobi, inevitably the first thing I
wanted to know was whether there had been any births or
deaths. “Have there been any demographic events?” I would
ask lightly, while tensely waiting to hear the answer. I always
felt happy when I heard about a birth and very sad when I was
told that an elephant had died, especially if it was an individual
I had known for many years.
Nevertheless, the demography of the Amboseli elephants is
one of my major interests and one of the most important
aspects of the long-term monitoring of the population. No
other study of elephants in Africa has ever been able to record
the data needed to describe the real dynamics of a population.
Usually a scientist is forced to take a subsample of a population
at one point in time and then extrapolate from that. But in
Amboseli we know, first of all, the whole population, which is
unusual in itself, and over a period of 11 years we have
recorded virtually all births and deaths, age at sexual maturity,
calving intervals, and the fecundity and mortality of animals at
different ages.
In approaching a demographic study, one first has to try to
define the population. I was fortunate in that Amboseli’s
elephants formed a fairly discrete population geographically.
They did not always, but by the time I started the study in 1972
they were more or less isolated from any surrounding elephant
populations. Historical records show that there used to be
elephants to the west, concentrated around the mountain called
Ol Donyo Orok, which is near the town of Namanga and 45
miles from the center of Amboseli. It is likely that these
elephants met up with Amboseli’s from time to time. Human
expansion and poaching forced out Namanga’s elephants and
there are no longer any there. Some of them may have moved
into Amboseli.
No elephants lived to the north except during the wet season,
when Amboseli’s own elephants migrated there and possibly
interacted with some of the elephants from Tsavo National
Park, which is to the east. Jonah’s aerial surveys showed that
Amboseli and Tsavo elephants overlapped slightly in their
ranges but rarely at the same time, so there was probably little
mixing of the two. In more recent times the Amboseli elephants

236

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

have not been going far enough north or east to meet the Tsavo
ones. Also to the east are the two swamps that I have mentioned
before, Namalog and Kimana. These are within the Amboseli
ecosystem and the elephants that use these swamps are part of
the Amboseli population.
There is a population of elephants to the south of Amboseli
living in the forests on the slopes of Kilimanjaro. A student
from Tanzania’s College of African Wildlife Management did a
survey of these elephants and estimated them to number about
1,200. Ever since I have been working in Amboseli the Kili¬
manjaro elephants, or “Kili elephants,” as they are known to us,
have been coming to Amboseli on visits. They usually arrive in
the wet season and stay for only a few days. I have speculated
that they probably come for salt, which there is an abundance
of in Amboseli and which is usually scarce on the slopes of
mountains.
When they are in Amboseli the Kili elephants mix with the
Amboseli ones, sometimes amicably and sometimes with ex¬
changes of threats and other forms of aggression. Their
appearance and behavior is totally different from that of the
Amboseli elephants and therefore there is no mistaking them.
The Kili elephants are, and I do not hesitate to say it, extremely
funny-looking, verging on being ugly. They are smaller and
leaner, have narrow pinched faces, with wrinkled foreheads
and hairy heads, little triangular-shaped ears, skewed, oddly
shaped tusks or no tusks, and squiggly, crooked tails which
rarely have any hair at the end. In the first five years or so of the
study they were extremely wary of vehicles on their visits and
would panic and run away or charge any time a car came within
100 yards of them. In the last few years they have calmed down
somewhat and a few of the Kili families and bulls are becoming
relaxed about tourist and research vehicles. However, most of
them still gather in a tight formation when they see my
Land-Rover, lift their heads, and threaten me, with their beady
little eyes glaring from over their misshapen tusks. I have
grown rather fond of them because they always make me laugh.
Although the Kili elephants mix with the Amboseli elephants,
there is every indication that they are two distinct populations.
We have seen a few cases of Kili females being mated by
Amboseli bulls, but this must not be a common occurrence since

POPULATION DYNAMICS

otherwise the general appearance of the elephants from the
two populations would not remain so distinct. Phyllis and Keith
found the carcass of a first-year Kili calf that had died in
Amboseli and the lower jaw (which we collect for aging) was
much smaller than the jaw of an Amboseli calf of the same age.
On this evidence taxonomists might even suggest that the Kili
elephants are a different race or subspecies of Loxodonta africana. It certainly looks as if they have been isolated from the
savanna populations for long enough to have changed in size
and body shape, possibly as an adaptation to living on forested
mountain slopes.
Thus, except for infrequent contact with elephants from the
east and south, Amboseli’s elephants are self-contained and
easily definable as a population. Jonah’s aerial counts in the
early seventies indicated that there were 600 to 700 elephants
in the ecosystem. In 1972, when Harvey and I started the
study, our method of finding out how many elephants there
were in the population was to photograph and register every
individual. Of course that took a few years. By 1974 we had
registered the majority of the cows and calves and less than
half of the bulls. I had also been recording births and deaths,
but because of the part-time nature of the study I am sure I
missed many.
Working backward from how many elephants there are in
1987, when every single individual is known, and taking into
account all the births and deaths per year since 1974, I have
arrived at a minimum figure of 602 elephants at the beginning
of 1974. This is a minimum because there were many elephants,
especially bulls, who were never registered.
Joyce and I examined photographs taken of the Amboseli
elephants from 1964—66 by ecologist Norman Myers, who at
that time was a professional photographer. Many of the females
were ones that I knew as older animals in the seventies and
eighties, but we could recognize only one of the numerous
males that he photographed. All the rest were gone by the time
we started taking pictures of the Amboseli bulls. There were at
least 20 big, distinctive, large-tusked males in those photo¬
graphs and we both felt disappointed that we had never seen
and known them. Norman Myers’s photographs gave us some
indication of the rate that the bulls were lost to hunters and

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

poachers in those years. I also examined photographs taken of
the Amboseli elephants by Mark Boulton (a conservationeducation specialist who is an excellent amateur photographer)
in 1968-69 and could see that there must have been a baby
boom at that time because there were many young calves.
There were also some females in the pictures that I had never
known. Taking all this into consideration I estimate that the
Amboseli population at the end of the 1960s was at least 650.
When I began the study in 1972 the Amboseli population was
in decline and continued to be for the next six years. Starting
from January 1, 1974, when our records for birth and deaths
were adequate, to December 31, 1978, there was a minimum
net loss of 124 elephants. These are the figures:

December 31

Number

Loss or Gain

1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978

602
575
551
502
479
478
Total

-27
-24
-49
-23
-1
-124

From the beginning of 1979 the population began to increase, and it continued to grow for the next five years, with a
net gain of 196 animals. Below are the figures for those five
years:

December 31

Number

Loss or Gain

1979
1980
1981
1982
1983

525
570
581
604
674
Total

+ 47
+ 45
+ 11
+ 23
+ 70
+ 196

All the gains during this five-year period were due to an
excess of births over deaths and not to immigration. In the
previous six years all the losses were due to an excess of deaths
over births and not to emigration. There is no evidence to

POPULATION DYNAMICS

indicate that any elephants have come into the population from
Tsavo or Kilimanjaro or that any have left to join these other
populations. When an elephant disappears we have every
reason to believe it is dead.
I have broken these figures into two sections to illustrate how
easy it is to make false assumptions about what is happening to
a population of such long-lived, slow-reproducing mammals. A
five- or six-year period is short-term for an elephant in a life
spanning over 60 years. Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the
population was in serious decline during most of the seventies
and if the rates of loss had continued at, say the level of 1976—
9 percent per year—the population would have become extinct
sometime in the early twenty-first century.
On the other hand, the rates of growth during the early
eighties might have been considered alarming to wildlife man¬
agers concerned with the possibility of “overpopulation.” In
1983 alone the Amboseli elephant population grew by 11.6
percent. But this percentage and the 9 percent loss in 1976 are
meaningless in themselves. Fluctuations from year to year can
be great, as well as very misleading. Unfortunately, crucial
decisions such as the initiation of culling programs, are often
based on data collected at one point in time. The Amboseli
project is unique in having long-term population data compiled
over 14 years. In many ways it is probably the most important
work that we have done because the Amboseli study shows that
elephants are flexible in their reproductive behavior and re¬
sponsive to the various conditions that they hnd themselves in.
We were not the first to show this reproductive flexibility.
Richard Laws had worked on culled elephants in Uganda,
Kenya, and Tanzania and found that there were significant
differences in many of the reproductive parameters between
populations, all of which could profoundly affect the popula¬
tion dynamics. For example, in the Budongo Forest Reserve in
Uganda he discovered that the age of puberty for females was
delayed until 22 years old and the average interval between the
births of calves for a single female was close to eight years. The
retarded age of puberty and the very long calving intervals
meant that this population could not possibly replace deaths
(natural or otherwise) with enough births and so it was in
decline. At the opposite extreme were the elephants of Mko-

239

240

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

mazi Game Reserve in Tanzania. Here the females were
reaching puberty at 12 years old and the average calving
interval was three years old. This population was growing.
Laws correlated these differences to population density—
that is, the number of elephants per square mile. In Budongo
there were 7.5 elephants per square mile, while in Mkomazi
there were only 2 per square mile. The relationship between
reproductive parameters and density appeared to correspond
in all the populations that he studied. However, in Manyara,
where Iain Douglas-Hamilton worked, the correlation did not
hold. There the elephants lived at a density of 14 per square
mile and yet they were a healthy, increasing population, with
females reaching puberty at 11 and with calving intervals of
four years. The difference appeared to be that Manyara’s
habitat was exceptionally rich and could support a high density
of elephants. Therefore, environmental conditions as well as
density were a key to understanding the regulation of elephant
populations.
There has been a good deal of controversy over the regula¬
tory processes at work within animal populations. Simply put,
one view holds that self-regulation occurs in populations ac¬
cording to density-dependent factors; the other view holds that
populations fluctuate in response to external environmental
conditions such as droughts, famines, and predation. In a
self-regulating population there is supposed to be an ideal
point of stability, but it is seldom reached in the real world. In
fluctuating populations animals increase when they can and
decline when conditions are unfavorable; there is no inherent
stability. At one time the extremes of these two views were
advocated, but more recently a sort of melding of the two has
occurred, and most people seem to agree now that populations
are influenced by a combination of many factors.
In the first six years of the Amboseli study, when the
population was in decline, several things were happening. Low
to average rainfall for three years, followed by drought for two
years, resulted in very poor environmental conditions that were
compounded by competition from over 10,000 Maasai cattle.
In those years calf mortality was high, with over 33 percent
dying before the end of their first year. There were also
mortalities among older calves, especially around the age of

A group of elephants, including the T families, crosses an open
pan on their morning journey to the swamps, with Kilimanjaro
behind.

Feeding on the coarse
swamp vegetation

A group rests bunched together with the smaller calves lying down
under their mothers and older siblings.

Mudwallowing

A young calf “charges” the author’s vehicle; some calves
are more adventurous than others from early on.

Slit Ear, Tara, and others feed on lush, abundant vegeta¬
tion during a year of high rainfall.

tmsmm

A large male (not in
musth) chases and catches
a young female by plac¬
ing his trunk along her
back (note S-shaped curve
of the penis).

She stops and he mounts,
searching for her vulva
with his mobile penis.

He achieves intromission
by sinking down and
hooking the penis into
the vulva and then pene¬
trating upward with most
of his weight on his hind
legs. (A young male
watches in fascination but
keeps his head very low
to indicate lack of aggres¬
sion and competition.)

Males in musth have very swollen temporal glands which exude
viscous liquid.

Greeting: Tallulah, Tuskless (center), Teresia (left), Tonie (right)

4

The “floppy run”

Tallulah and her new¬
born calf and “assistant”
Tara: The baby, still very
wobbly on its feet, reaches
out and explores with its
trunk (part of the umbili¬
cal cord still hangs down).

The calf tries to suckle on
Tara’s leg.

A #:

Tallulah and Tara have
nearly buried the calf
with fine soil and grass.

I
*' >8%
'

■ ^SSiV ,

<*»A

Tonie trying to lift her dead baby, who was either stillborn or died
shortly after birth in November 1980 Joyce Poole

Phyllis and Keith with a
bushbaby that lived in
the camp

The author’s tent and vehicle in Amboseli

A family group feeds in the camp in the late afternoon.

Tom and Tao play in the lush grass as their older relatives feed.

The wary elephants from Kilimanjaro visit Amboseli for a few days
at a time.

The Amboseli Maasai are changing their way of
life: The traditional and the modern meet in a
cabbage patch near Namalog swamp.

Ivory: It may be a beautiful substance when carved into an elegant
figurine, but it was once the tusk of a living elephant who used it to
feed and dig, play and fight.

POPULATION DYNAMICS

weaning. In addition, there was poaching, spearing, and hunt¬
ing, and thus adults were dying as well.
At the same time reproductive rates were low, showing the
same kind of patterns that Laws had found in other elephant
populations. The Amboseli females appeared to be delayed in
reaching sexual maturity and were not giving birth to their first
calves until they were 16 to 17 years old. The average calving
interval was over six years.
A possible mechanism involved in reducing the birthrate was
revealed by examining conception rates in those years of
decline. From known births for 1976-78 I was able to estimate
the conception rates for 1974-76. (Previous to this time my
birth records were not accurate enough to estimate conception
rates.) There were 24 conceptions in 1974, five in 1975, and
none in 1976. To give a more accurate picture of reproductive
activity, I worked out the percent conceiving of the total
number of females available to conceive in each of those years.
For this analysis females were considered available if they were
over ten years old and were neither pregnant nor suckling a
calf below the age of two years. The following figures were
derived:

1974

1975

1976

No. of females available

82

59

90

Percent who conceived

29%

8%

0%

It would appear that the Amboseli females virtually stopped
reproductive activity for two years. As a result there were no
births for 16 months from July 1977 to November 1978 and
only two births for a period of 22 months from January 1, 1977,
to November 24, 1978. The available females seemed to have
stopped cycling. During 1975 and 1976 I saw only five females
in estrus and none of them gave birth 22 months later. There
is no evidence to show that females were cycling, conceiving,
and then aborting, and elephants do not reabsorb fetuses
under unfavorable conditions as some animals do. Human
females and some other mammals stop cycling when body fat
reserves go below a certain level and I suspect that this is what

241

242

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

happened to the Amboseli elephants during the drought years.
The elephants were not at the point of starvation (I had seen
elephants dying from lack of food in Tsavo National Park a few
years before) but they were in relatively poor condition and
must have reached the critical threshold to stop the necessary
hormone production.
Thus, in terms of population regulation in the Amboseli ele¬
phants, several things seem to come into play: high calf mortality,
delayed puberty, long calving intervals, and cessation of repro¬
ductive activity altogether. Which of these factors are densitydependent and which environmentally induced is difficult to say.
The elephants were at locally high densities during the drought,
when they had to concentrate on the swamps, causing severe
competition over the already poor and meager forage available
there. The low quantity and quality of the food resulted in poor
nutritional status, which led to high calf mortality and changes
in female reproductive parameters and activity.
These records of the various changes that occurred during
the drought were very important in understanding how ele¬
phants responded to unfavorable conditions. Just as important
was how the elephants responded when conditions improved.
After the drought finally broke at the end of 1976, the African
savanna made its usual near-miraculous recovery, and soon
there was an abundance of nutritious vegetation. It took only
two months for females to start coming into estrus again, but
not all the available females did so at once. Conceptions started
taking place in Feburary 1977, reached a peak in July, slowed
down during the latter part of the year, and then picked up
again in early 1978, peaking that year in April during the rains.
In all, 100 females conceived in the 19-month period covering
February 1977 through August 1978. Needless to say this
caused a baby boom approximately two years later, in 1978,
1979, and 1980. Five calves were born in November-December
1978, 57 in 1979, and 39 more in the first half of 1980, making
101 calves, the one hundredth birth being the twins that I have
mentioned before. The population had increased by 21 percent
in less than two years.
The pattern of resumption of reproductive activity was
interesting to examine. The percent of females conceiving in
1977 and 1978 provided a contrast to the previous three years:

POPULATION DYNAMICS

1977

1978

No. of females available

116

101

Percent who conceived

36%

60%

However, in looking at the data I wondered why more
females did not conceive in 1977. Only 42 of the 116 available
females became pregnant. Among those 42 females an unex¬
pected pattern emerged: Thirty-three belonged to central
groups, three to peripheral eastern families that had immi¬
grated and become central groups, and six from peripheral
western families. The relative percentage of conceptions in
each of the subpopulations was also significant: Forty-three
percent of the available central females conceived, while only
19 percent of the available peripheral females did. It looked as
though the females in the central families had recovered more
quickly, possibly because they had not gone down so far in
condition as the other elephants had. Even within the central
families some females took longer to recover than others. Most
of the females who conceived in the first two years were over 20
years old. The younger females who should have reached
puberty needed a longer period to catch up. They and the
peripheral elephants started conceiving at higher rates in 1979,
two years after the others had resumed reproductive activity.
I had based my designation of “central” and “peripheral” on
spatial sorting and not on differences in population structure,
but when I discovered the delayed response of the peripheral
elephants, I felt justified in saying that the Amboseli popula¬
tion could be divided into two subpopulations. There was a
significant difference in reproductive success between the two
and this opened up some important questions about how and
why the two subpopulations are distributed the way they are,
since it looks as if it is better to be a central elephant than a
peripheral one.
At the same time that the baby boom was occurring, mortality
rates were going down tremendously. The survivorship of
first-year calves were very high compared to that in the drought
years. Of the 101 calves that were born, 94 percent reached
their first year, whereas only 48 percent of the 1976 calves had

243

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

done so. The hunting ban, which had been instituted in 1977,
and a successful crackdown on poaching reduced mortality
among the adults. In addition the Maasai were happy with both
the high rainfall and the agreement that had been made with
the government, and so there was very little spearing as a form
of protest. Even more important, in the following year, 1978,
all the warriors, the moran, were promoted to junior elders and
nd moran was initiated for the next six years. It is the moran
who have to prove their bravery by killing large, dangerous
wild animals. Without a moran class the wildlife was left in
relative peace.
Births and deaths are not the only data points that students
of population dynamics are concerned with. In order to make
predictions about what a population is going to do, one has to
take other variables into account, such as sex ratios and age
structures. I looked at these things as well in the Amboseli
population.
The sexes of all but two of the 101 calves born during the
1978-80 baby boom were recorded. The two who were unre¬
corded died shortly after birth. The remaining 99 calves
revealed a very neat 1:1 sex ratio as follows:

Year of Birth

Male

Female

Total

4

5
56
38
99

1978
1979
1980

29

17

1
27
21

Total

50

49

Previous and subsequent births also showed an overall 1:1
sex ratio, which seems to be consistent among the Amboseli
elephants.
The age structure of an animal population is vital to know in
order to make predictions about what will happen to the
population in the future. For example, if the population has a
large majority of young animals, then, when those individuals
reach reproductive age, the population will almost certainly
increase in the absence of high mortality caused by poaching or
other external factors. On the other hand, if there are large

POPULATION DYNAMICS

numbers of middle-aged and old animals with few young
animals to replace them, the population will probably decline.
In Amboseli, all the elephants born since the end of 1975
have known birth dates, accurate to within a month. For those
born during the part-time study, 1972-75, the accuracy is
within at the most six months and a majority are known to
within three months. One- to three-year-old calves that were
first seen in 1972 and 1973 could be aged fairly reliably by their
size and tusk eruption and are considered known-aged to
within a year. These calves bring recorded birth dates back to
1970. At the present time (1987), there are 360 animals from
newborn to 17 years old whose ages are positively known, which
is well over half the population.
These known-aged animals have made it possible for us to
devise techniques to estimate elephant ages elsewhere in Africa.
The most common aging method used for elephants involves
the examination of their teeth. Elephants have six sets of teeth
throughout their lifetime. Each tooth is a lozenge-shaped molar
(the Latin name for the African elephant Loxodonta refers to its
tooth shape) and there are only four molars in use at any one
time, one each on the upper and lower two sides of the jaw.
Each set of four new molars grows from the back and moves
foward, pushing out the previous set. The timing of the
eruption of the new sets of molars, when they come into use
and when the old set falls out, is consistent with age. Elephants
are born with molar sets 1 and 2 in the jaw; set 1 falls out when
the elephant is about two years; set 2 is lost at about six years;
set 3 at about 13 to 15 years; set 4 at 28 years; and set 5 at
approximately 43 years. Molar set 6 appears at about 30 years
of age and comes into use when the elephant is in its early
forties. Very rarely elephants may have a seventh set of molars,
but usually the sixth set is the final one and that has to last the
elephant for another 20 or more years. By the time an elephant
is in its sixties, its last set of molars is worn down. Eventually it
cannot feed properly and death results.
Tooth eruption and wear is an excellent method of aging
elephants but the major problem is that the elephant has to be
dead (or captive and tame) in order to use it. Another aging
technique is measuring shoulder height. The taller an elephant
is the older it is. The method was hrst worked out by Richard

245

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

Laws, who took measurements of hundreds of elephants killed
in culling schemes. He found a correlation between shoulder
height and tooth age. Fortunately shoulder height can be
measured on live elephants. Iain Douglas-Hamilton designed
an ingenious device with two cameras, which took a double¬
image photograph of an elephant. This could then be measured
for shoulder height. He was able to photograph most of the
Manyara population and get fairly accurate ages for individuals
under 20 and put the older animals in age classes. In Amboseli
Harvey and I measured shoulder heights in a less technically
sophisticated way with a graduated pole. First we photographed
the elephant as it crossed a road or other level spot, then one of
us would go with the pole to the very spot where the elephant
had crossed and stand with the pole and be photographed.
Later, when the two photos were printed, we could measure the
shoulder height of the elephant against the pole.
A few years later Jonah, with the aid of his assistant Nick
Georgiadis and Joyce and me, devised a clear, easy, and cheap
technique for aging elephants. Jonah noted that the soil in
Amboseli is soft and dusty for much of the year and that
elephants leave very distinct footprints when they walk. He
wondered if the size of an elephant’s foot correlated with its
shoulder height and thus its age. First we did an experiment.
We took pole measurements of 30 elephants of various ages
and sexes and at the same time measured their hind footprint.
We chose the hind foot because elephants tend to place the
hind foot on top of the forefoot print. On measuring the
photos we discovered a very close correlation between shoulder
height and footprint length. This meant that we simply had to
measure footprints in order to estimate the ages of the Ambo¬
seli elephants.
We were then able to make the technique far more accurate
by using our own known-aged animals. The original tooth and
shoulder-height technique was based on only a few knownaged zoo animals. Amboseli was able to provide a much larger
sample. In 1983 and 1984, when Phyllis was working on calf
development, she measured the footprints of most of the calves
and older juveniles and together with Keith was able to work
out an age and growth curve which is probably the most
accurate ever done for elephants. This new curve and the

POPULATION DYNAMICS

footprint-measuring technique have been helpful to scientists
working on elephants in other areas of Africa. Jonah, Nick, and
I published a paper in 1983 on the footprint technique entitled
“Age estimation and population age structure of elephants
from footprint dimensions” in the Journal of Wildlife Manage¬
ment. The growth curve was presented in the 1986 joint paper
that Phyllis and I published in Behavioural Ecology and Sociobiol¬
ogy on “Early maternal investment in male and female African
elephant calves.”
However, these field-aging techniques on live elephants are A
still accurate only for animals under 20 years old. Since the rate
of growth of females tapers off and nearly stops after 25 years
old, the techniques cannot be used for assigning accurate ages
to adult females. Males continue to grow at a perceptible rate
but their age is not as important as that of females in population
dynamics (in fact the males are left out of most models). The
foot of an adult female grows less than an inch in perhaps ten
years, making it difficult to distinguish a 25-year-old from a
35-year-old. For these older animals we have to estimate their
ages and place them in classes of 5- or 10- or 15-year blocks.
To my bewilderment I have always been uncannily accurate
at estimating the ages of the adult females by eye. In the early
stages I was not totally conscious what I was cueing into, but
whenever a female died and we collected her lower jaw to
examine the teeth, the age I had assigned her by eye was always
within two years of the tooth age. When I tried to sort out what
I was doing, I realized that I took into account the size of the
female, the circumference of her tusks at the lip, and her
general overall appearance, how bony she was around the
shoulders, how sunken her head above the eyes. Not only did I
attempt to judge shoulder height, but with females I found it
was more important to look at the length of the body. Old
females, instead of getting taller, seemed to grow longer.
Teresia, who came from a short-legged family anyway, had
grown so long that she somewhat resembled a dachshund.
People who were not on the elephant project knew Teresia for
her funny shape and often remarked on it. Virginia, Jezebel,
and Horatia, females in their fifties, also had long bodies, but
being taller in the leg than Teresia, they did not look as odd.
One other important bit of information I used in estimating

247

248

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

the ages of the adult females was old photographs. The
photographs taken by Norman Myers in 1964—66 proved to be
extremely helpful. For example, Norman took several roles of
, film of the Ts. I was fascinated to see that way back in 1964,
over 20 years ago, the same four families were together in a
tight-knit coordinated group. I could recognize Teresia, Torn
Ear, Slit Ear, and Tania, and I think even little Tuskless. With
' Torn Ear in the photos was a two- to three-year-old calf who
should have had tusks by that age but did not. I am sure this
was Tuskless. Teresia, Torn Ear, and Slit Ear were definitely
big adult females even then. I estimated Teresia to be at least 40
years old in 1964 and put the others at ten or more years
younger.
Each year, with accumulated knowledge, I was able to age the
older animals more accurately. As the known-aged animals got
older I had a better idea of what a 12-, 13- or 14-year-old
elephant looked like. Then when I reexamined the early
photographs, mine included, I was able to add on the relevant
number of years and come up with an age at the present time.
For example, I can now look at the pictures I took of Tallulah
and Tess in 1973 and feel fairly confident that they were then
about ten years old because today I can compare their size and
tusk growth to an absolutely known-aged elephant of ten,
Tabitha, from their own bond group. I have spent a great deal
of time going back over my photographs, Norman Myers’s, and
Mark Boulton’s, to refine the aging each year. In the meantime,
as elephants died, we collected their lower jaws and aged them
by their teeth, and in this way I was getting a better idea of what
30-, 40-, or 50-year-olds looked like. Joyce was using the same
estimating techniques for the males, not so much for population
dynamics as for the relationships between age and dominance
and age and musth.
It is a peculiarity of elephant age structures that they almost
always contain peaks and troughs—that is, there will be numer¬
ous individuals in one age class, very few in the next couple,
and then a bunch more in the following class. In other words,
there is not an even distribution of ages through the population.
Looking at the structure of the known-aged female elephants in
the Amboseli population in 1983, there are distinct humps for
certain ages:

POPULATION DYNAMICS

1983
70

60
C/3
C/3

n3

U

Total = 175

50

<u

be

<
XI

40

.S

30

u
a
W

u
v
X
g 20
3
Z
10

0 to 3

3 to 6

6 to 9

9 to 12

12 to 15

Age Classes
There were a lot of animals in the 12- to 15-year-old age
bracket, few in the 9- to 12-year range, hardly any in the 6- to
9-year class, and then suddenly peaks of 3- to 6-year-olds and 0to 3-year-olds.
I have already described one of the circumstances that cause
these bumps to occur: Elephants can cease or be inhibited in
reproductive activity under unfavorable conditions, and at the
same time calf mortality may be high for those calves that are
born. A second reason for peaks and troughs is an inherent
biological constraint: Elephant gestation length and calving
intervals make it difficult for there to be even age distributions.
If conditions were uniform and continuously favorable, ele¬
phants might produce the same number of calves per year. If
there were 100 females in a population and an average calving
interval of four years, then one would expect 25 calves per year.
It never seems to work this way. Once the population hits some

249

250

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

sort of snag and the females stop breeding or there is high calf
mortality, a wave pattern is set up. The females tend to breed
in synchrony and produce many calves in the space of a couple
of years, and because of the three- or four- or more-year
calving interval they tend to breed again in synchrony a few
years later.
To further accentuate the peaks and troughs, the females
that are born in a particular baby-boom period all enter the
breeding population at the same time and then create their own
wave pattern, often in synchrony with the older females because
they are affected by the same environmental conditions.
All these factors—the drought, the breeding synchrony, the
calving interval, and the influx of a large cohort of young adult
females—contributed to the unprecedented baby boom of
1983, during which 81 calves were born. I thought I had
witnessed a remarkable baby boom in 1979—80 but that was
over a two-year period. The 1983 baby boom basically covered
only six months; 74 of the calves were born from February
through July 1983, the remaining seven born from August
through December.
What had happened was that the females who had calves in
1979 and 1980 were ready to give birth again in 1983. Thus the
females who gave birth in 1979 conceived again in 1981 and
gave birth in 1983 after a calving interval of about four years.
The females who had given birth in 1980 surprised us by also
conceiving in 1981 and giving birth in 1983 after only a
three-year calving interval. The shortest interval I have re¬
corded in Amboseli is two years and seven months, but I think
this is unusual and one of the lowest possible. These intervals
are for females whose previous calf was surviving. Shorter
intervals are possible when a calf dies at or near birth. For
example, Tonie, who lost her calf at birth, had a calving interval
of only two years. The three-year calving intervals for females
with surviving calves showed that elephants can step up their
reproductive rates under favorable conditions, once again
revealing the flexible responses of elephants.
The contribution of these mature females’ calves to the baby
boom was important, but what really made it outstanding was
the coming of age of a whole group of young females who had
been born in the years 1968-70. Forty-three young females

POPULATION DYNAMICS

reached sexual maturity around 1981 and many of them
conceived in that year and gave birth in 1983. From the
Amboseli records it appears that 11 to 12 years is the common
age for puberty in females, although, as one would expect,
there were a few who started cycling earlier, at nine and ten
years old. At the same time there were some females who did
not appear to give birth for the first time until they were over
20 years old.
By 1983 every adult female over 20 had given birth except
for one, Paula. She had never been seen in estrus, nor had she
shown signs of pregnancy. Paula was named Paula only recently
because for many years I thought she was a young male. “He”
was called “Petra’s Young Male,” and I had given “him” a male
number, Ml76, and carried “his” photo identification card in
the bull box. It was only ^when the young matriarch of the
family, Petra, gave birth and I noted that M176 was paying a
great deal of attention to the calf that I grew suspicious. My
notes read:
1030 Petra’s Young Male, Ml76, acts like a young female
toward Petra’s baby, backing in and reaching to touch it.
This is the first time I have ever seen a male behave in this
way.
1115 Ml76 is behaving in this way because “he” is a female!
I was shocked, as were Joyce, Keith, and Phyllis. Everyone
thought she was a male. Her head and tusk shape were very
masculine, but she definitely had female genitalia. However,
the vulva was difficult to see because it was placed farther
forward between the hind legs than is usual. I can also give
myself another excuse for not being a total idiot since Paula and
Petra are from the PB family, which is one of the most
peripheral families and is not seen that often. In the early days
they were frightened of cars and would not allow me to come
near them. I simply never looked that closely at Ml76’s genitals.
But I think it is significant that Paula has never had a calf and
I suspect that there is something abnormal with her hormones
and possibly even with her reproductive organs. All the same,
the fact that there is only one female who is abnormal shows
that the Amboseli elephants are healthy and fertile.

252

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

One final question of interest in the study of population
dynamics is when females slow down or stop reproducing.
Females well into their forties are fertile and continue to
produce calves regularly. There are only a few females esti¬
mated at over 50 years old in the Amboseli population, and
although my data do not suggest a “menopause” in these
animals, there are indications that the rate at which they
produce calves is lowered and the ability to produce viable
offspring may also be affected. Of the six or so females who are
near or over 50, four of them—Teresia, Virginia, Lillian, and
Big Tuskless—lost their most recent calves shortly after birth.
As I mentioned before, Teresia and Virginia had not had calves
for nine years before these last calves. After the calves died the
mothers showed no further signs of conceiving again. This
lowered fertility in the older age classes has to be taken into
account when designing population models.
As far as drawing up a simulation model to try to say what the
Amboseli population is going to do, I think it is mainly a
theoretical and only partially valuable exercise. There is a
danger of overrelying on the predictions of models. At the end
of 1983, with the population at 674, it looked as if the elephants
were rapidly increasing and would continue to do so, but,
although models can factor in catastrophes and droughts, these
events are still very unpredictable in their timing and severity.
Even with 14 years of data I would still hesitate to try to say
what is going to happen to the population in the next ten years.
Conditions can change drastically. In 1983 no one could have
known that 1984 was going to be such a disastrous year in so
many ways for the Amboseli elephants.
In the meantime 1983 was a delightful time to be in Ambo¬
seli, both for the elephants and for the elephant researchers.
Baby elephants truly appeared to be falling out of the sky
during those first six months. It was wonderful for Phyllis, who
had just started her study of calf development and was hoping
she would have a large enough sample size. She turned out to
have far more calves than she had ever hoped for. In fact she
had all she could do on some days just to record the new births
and get the sexes of the babies. By midyear there were over two
hundred calves under the age of five years. She studied the
young calves and also the behavior of their older siblings. The

POPULATION DYNAMICS

interactions between sisters and brothers was a fascinating
mixture of sibling rivalry and care and concern.
The Ts continued to be a good bond group for the study of
calves of various ages and combinations of siblings. Tania was
the first of the Ts to produce a calf in 1983. She gave birth to
a female around April 20. My records indicate that this was her
first daughter in 20 years; she had had sons in 1962, 1968,
1973, and 1979. Slit Ear was the next to give birth, to yet
another daughter, making this her sixth daughter in a row in
the past 20 years. Tia had a new calf less than a week later, on
May 23, and this time she had a daughter after producing three
sons. It was about a month later that Tamar died in giving
birth. Around July 4 Tallulah gave birth to her second daugh¬
ter, and as far as we could tell (we did not see the actual birth)
she took it all in her stride now that she was an experienced
older female of 20 years. Finally, on August 22, little Tilly,
Torn Ear’s 13-year-old daughter, gave birth to her first calf, a
male.
Despite Tamar’s death it was an excellent year for the Ts in
terms of reproductive success. It was to prove to be short-term,
but at the end of 1983 all looked rosy—or, for elephants, the
metaphor should be “green”—and they went into 1984 with the
largest number in their bond group since I had first met them.
Right Fang had become independent at 14 years old, leaving
the four family units with the following 29 animals:

Tuskless (62)
Tuo (80)

9
8

Tonie (67)
C’82

9
8

Tilly (70)
C’83

9
8

tb

Tania (44)
C’83
Tom (79)
Toby (73)

9
9
8
8

tc

Slit Ear (36)
C’83
Slo (80)

9
9
9

ta

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

td

Tabitha (76)
Tara (67)
C’82
Tess (63)
C’82 (50)

9
9
3
9
9

Tia (50)
C’83
Tio (80)
Taddeus (76)

9
9
3
3

Teresia (22)
Tolstoy (71)
Theodora (67)
C’82

9
3
9
3

Tallulah (63)
C’83
Tao (80)

9
9
9

Life Cycle and Death
1984

The “long rains” of 1984 had been very poor, the lowest for
many years, and conditions were approaching those of 1976.
Rainfall had been below average in 1982 and above average in
1983 but that one good year was not enough to build up
sufficient reserves, and when the rains virtually failed in 1984,
there was another full-fledged drought. In June food was
already scarce.
The Ts had migrated out of the basin briefly during the April
and May rains, but they were soon forced back to the Amboseli
swamps when the temporary water holes dried up and the
ephemeral flush of grass gave out. As always, the TAs and TBs,
led by Tuskless and Tania, returned to their usual haunts
around the lodges and bandas. Tuskless had given birth to a
calf in March, and the renewed demands of lactation increased
her need for nutritious food. She led her family on a continuous
round of the rubbish pits and even pilfered the banda’s garbage
pails and stuck her trunk right into the kitchens, totally
terrifying the staff and tourists. In the evenings the TAs and

257

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

.

TBs crossed over to the Serena Lodge, situated at the source of
the Enkongo Narok swamp, and broke into its garden area to
feed on the decorative plants, some of which were quite tasty.
Serena’s garbage pit was also just a slight depression in the
ground and there was no problem foraging there.
The TCs and TDs, led by Slit Ear and Teresia, started the dry
season with their usual routine of spending the night in the
woodlands and bushlands to the east and south and coming
into either Longinye swamp or the small swamps in the Ol
Tukai Orok area in the daytime. However, as in 1982, they
found many other elephants using these areas and not very
much food to go around.
In mid-June Slit Ear initiated the strategy that Teresia had
used in 1982 by leading the two families to Namalog. Teresia
was now over 60 years old and left most decisions about daily
movements and activities up to Slit Ear. She always followed,
making her way in her own good time. She often came along 30
yards or so behind the others, not limping or stiff or ill, but just
very slow. Her teeth were worn down to small smooth discs
about one quarter the size of the original molars. This was her
sixth set of teeth and no new ones were coming in. She found
it difficult to chew the coarse, fibrous swamp vegetation, and
the tough bark and hard branches of trees were even more
difficult to process. Still, with extra chewing and longer feeding
bouts, she was able to get enough to eat when there was food
available.
On the night of their move they had come out of Longinye
and had fed and then slept for a while in the Olodo Are
woodlands. When they got up, earlier than usual, at about 3:00
a.m., Slit Ear turned toward the east and after some gentle
rumbling, foot swinging, and coordinating of group members,
she headed toward the park boundary and Namalog. Teresia
concurred and followed along.
The TCs and TDs together were quite a respectable group
size now, and walking along in a column of about two abreast,
they were 19 animals. Slit Ear, with her long, sweeping,
upcurved tusks gleaming in the moonlight, was in the lead. She
was followed closely by her year-old calf, three more daughters,
and her grandson, Tara’s C’82. Then came Tia and her three
calves one daughter and two sons. (Right Fang sometimes still

LIFE CYCLE AND DEATH

joined his family or the TAs and TBs, but mostly he fed around
the camp in the big glade that he knew so well.) Next came Tess
and her daughter, and after a slight gap Tallulah came along
leading the TDs. She was followed by her two daughters, and
Theodora and her son, and Teresia’s big son Tolstoy. There
was another break of about 20 yards, and then slowly but
steadily came old Teresia, with her two broken-off tusks and
her long, low, swaybacked body. She was as dignified as ever.
The two families walked deliberately but not rapidly and left
the park well before dawn. They passed the Maasai wells and
two enkangs and moved on to the tip end of the Namalog
drainage. After crossing the depression, they skirted along the
northern edge of the swamp until they entered a stand of tall
Acacia xanthophloea trees. Here the elephants fed for a while
before continuing on along the swamp edge. However, they
soon came upon something they rarely encountered in their
range—a fence with posts and wire, not a thorn barrier which
the Maasai made around their living areas. They knew the
fences around sections of the lodges and they had seen fences
on the southern side of Namalog several years before, but there
were none anywhere else in the areas they went to. When they
had spent the two months at Namalog in 1982, there had been
no fences on this side of the swamp, nor had there been people
this far west. From beyond this fence came the strong smells of
Maasai and domestic stock and an unpleasant odor of strange
vegetation. Slit Ear and the others turned back and entered the
deep swamp, crossing to the island where they had been left in
peace before.
When day broke, they heard the sounds of cattle bells and
Maasai whistles and shouts, and later the chopping and break¬
ing of wood and a thumping on the earth. All this commotion
made the elephants uneasy, especially because it came from
close to the swamp edge and not that far from the island. Now
that they were there, the elephants stayed on the island for the
day and left after dark, retreating back into the park for the
night. The food had been fairly abundant on the island and in
the swamp around it, and the next morning they started back to
feed at Namalog again. Once more they entered the deep
swamp just before dawn and fed for most of the day, with only
the disturbance of the sounds coming across to them.

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

However, around 4:30 in the afternoon, a mixed herd of
sheep and goats accompanied by some Maasai boys came down
to the swamp edge directly across from the Ts. Some of the
goats started into the swamp, hopping from one clump of
vegetation to the next. All the elephants’ trunks went up like
periscopes, reaching out of the reeds and papyrus. The wind
was coming directly from the boys and the livestock to them,
and the intruders were too close for comfort. The elephants
started to hurry out of the swamp, heading for the opposite
shore to the southwest. They plunged through the water and
mud and thick entangling roots. The adults simply broke
through the vegetation, but the calves kept getting stuck.
Theo’s C’82 got caught in a mass of roots and screamed in
fright as he started to go under the water. Both Theo and
Teresia came to his rescue and helped him get free. All the
elephants got to the shore, clambered out, and began walking
rapidly, almost at a run, toward the west and the park.
It was the wrong time to be leaving the protection of the
swamp, but they had had no choice. They kept to the edge of
the swamp, although on this side it was fairly open. They had
almost reached the end of the Namalog drainage when sud¬
denly, from behind a clump of young acacias, stepped three
Maasai men, each with a long glinting spear. Slit Ear saw them
first and gave an alarm, and they all turned and ran. The three
Maasai sprinted toward the elephants at an angle, trying to cut
Slit Ear off, but she swerved and got past with her family and
Tolstoy, Tallulah, and Theo and their calves closely bunched
behind. Out on her own, unable to run as fast as the others, was
Teresia.
The men quickly raced toward her with spears poised in their
right hands, raised parallel to the ground and above their
shoulders. The first man threw his with a tremendous thrust
combined with the momentum of his sprint. It hit Teresia in
the left shoulder and drove deep into the muscle more than six
inches. The next man flung his spear just as she turned to
charge. It went through her ear and into her neck. The third
man hesitated, aimed carefully, and with all his power threw his
spear and hit Teresia behind the shoulder. He had aimed for
the heart and had just missed. The blade went slightly to the
right and between two ribs.

LIFE CYCLE AND DEATH

Teresia groaned in pain with each strike and staggered when
the third spear hit, but she did not fall down. She charged, and
with no more weapons the Maasai had to run. After chasing
them only briefly she turned back toward Namalog and in
agonizing pain made her way around to the northern side. Two
of the spears had fallen out, but the first, the one that had gone
into her shoulder, was still embedded. It scraped against the
bone as she tried to run. She limped her way to the thickest part
of the swamp edge and hid among the dense bush. There was
no way she could catch up to the others, who were now halfway
back to Olodo Are, running at full speed and very frightened.
When Teresia reached the thicket she stopped, her sides
heaving with the effort. With her trunk she grasped the spear
and pulled and twisted it until it came out. The original
penetration had torn through her muscles and in wrenching it
out she did more damage. She had made it to the thicket by
sheer will. Now she could barely move. The three men had not
tried to follow her. For the moment she was safe, but they or
others could find her later and finish her off with more spears.
However, Teresia had had much experience in avoiding
Maasai during her life and she managed to elude them by
sticking to the thick bush and keeping just ahead of the herders
when they came near. She was in considerable pain and was
seriously crippled by her shoulder wound, but she was not near
death because the spears had not severed any arteries, nor had
they hit any vital organs. After two days of hiding while
recovering her strength, she was able to move down to the
swamp to drink and even feed for a while. She was not strong
enough to try to make it back to the park and her family. She
had to remain at Namalog on her own. A few Maasai saw her
during this period and noticed that she was wounded but they
were not interested in killing her. It was not very exciting or
brave to kill an old wounded animal, so they left her alone. For
her attackers it had been a spur-of-the-moment sport.
The danger to Teresia did not come from the Maasai, but in
a more insidious form. Teresia’s wounds were narrow and
deep, which was very bad for an elephant. The thick, tough
skin tends to nearly close up around the openings, making it
difficult for puncture wounds to drain properly. Teresia’s
shoulder wound was draining well because it was kept open by

261

262

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

her movement. The other two wounds were not draining and
soon became infected. It was a slow process, but eventually the
infection spread and turned to septicemia, a general poisoning
of the blood. All three wounds oozed a greenish-yellow pus.
Ten days after she was speared, Teresia was still alive but
losing the battle with the infection, which had spread through¬
out her body. She was in less pain now but feverish; she barely
fed and just managed to get to the swamp edge to drink. She
was thirsty most of the time because of the fever and so tried to
stay as close to running water as possible without meeting
Maasai.
After two more days Teresia could no longer move and stood
in the shade of a tree, swaying slightly with unsteadiness and
only semiconscious. She had reached a state of feeling little and
she mostly dreamed, perhaps of vast swards of sweet new grass
and clear, cool hill streams. Or the taste and feel of the sweet
juices that squirted out when she crunched down on her
favorite wild fruit. Or most likely the smell and touch and
sounds of her family—those who were still alive and others who
were long gone, her grandmother, mother, sisters and brothers,
sons and daughters.
On her hnal day Teresia grew too weak to stand and slowly
subsided onto the ground, first onto her chest and then over on
her side. She was conscious of the sounds and smells around
her for a while longer, but soon there was nothing. Her long
life was over.
I am not going to try to pretend that I was not more affected by
the death of Teresia than by that of any other elephant. I had
grown very attached to that funny-looking old elephant and I
knew I would feel sorrow and loss when she died. By the end of
1983, when I saw how slow she was and how old she looked I
knew she was going to die in the next couple of years of natural
causes if nothing else because of her age and her teeth. But I
did not want Teresia to die in pain and suffering and I worried
about her. Each time I went to Amboseli or each time Phyllis
and Keith came to Nairobi, I asked about Teresia in particular,
not just “Have there been any deaths?” but “Have you seen
Teresia? Is she all right?”
When I arrived in Amboseli for a short stay in June 1984,

LIFE CYCLE AND DEATH
>

Phyllis and Keith reluctantly told me that they thought “some¬
thing” had happened to Teresia. They knew it would upset me
but they had to tell me. Phyllis had found the TCs and TDs
running through Olodo Are with their tails up and their ears
tilted up and back in a posture of fear and distress. Teresia was
not with them. During the following week the two families were
seen again, and Teresia was still not with them. We were fairly
sure she was ill, wounded, or dead and I went back to Nairobi
feeling frustrated and unhappy about not knowing what had
happened and where she was. Then the next week I got a
message telling me that Teresia had been seen at Namalog by a
Maasai friend of ours, Daniel Nkurupe. She had been speared
and was ill. Daniel had gone out elephant watching with Joyce
many times and knew several of the elephants by sight, includ¬
ing Teresia, who with her odd shape and broken tusks was very
easy to recognize. The news that she was alive gave me some
hope but I was distressed to think of her alone and wounded at
Namalog. A couple of more weeks went by and Daniel did not
see Teresia again, nor did she return to Amboseli. We knew she
was dead.
However sad we all were, we also did not want her death to
go to waste in terms of scientific information. She was estimated
by me to be the oldest elephant in the population and we very
much wanted to collect her lower jaw to see how old she was by
the tooth aging method. Keith and Phyllis set to work as
detectives. All the Maasai in the area knew who had speared
Teresia, but no one would say who they were and no one would
say where the carcass was in case it was assumed that that
person had been responsible for her death. After much nego¬
tiation in a covert operation involving Maasai friends and
intermediaries, a Maasai led Keith and Phyllis to the carcass.
They found the partially rotted body and saw that Teresia had
spear wounds but not many. The tusks were gone. They
worked loose the lower jaw and the upper molars and took
them back to camp. By Laws’s aging criteria Teresia was 62,
plus or minus two years. I had estimated her to be 60 and had
put her year of birth at 1924. I now revised it to 1922.
It was intriguing to try to imagine what Teresia must have
experienced in that long life. For half of her life she probably
very rarely saw cars and encountered few man-made structures

263

264

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

other than Maasai mud and dung huts. There were only
elephants, other wild animals, the Maasai, their livestock, and
sometimes people who came to hunt or poach. When she was
well into her thirties, things began to change and more vehicles
appeared and buildings went up in places where she used to
feed. The cars probably frightened her for many years but
eventually, when nothing bad seemed to occur around them,
she got used to them. In the last ten years of her life she
tolerated them completely and almost certainly knew by sight
and smell the research vehicles with the particular people in
them that followed her for hours at a time.
Changes in Teresia’s habitat caused by conservation efforts
and tourism may have been inconvenient and possibly irritating
at times, but I suspect that they were basically extraneous and
unimportant to her life in general. I think what mattered most
to Teresia was her family—her calves and her other relatives;
and her concern was how best to protect them and secure the
resources that she and they needed to survive and flourish. I like
to think that Teresia was able to pursue these goals without too
much interference and that she had a relatively good life for an
African elephant living in the twentieth century. Very few ele¬
phants are able to live out their full lifespan in the way that she
did. Amboseli is probably one of the last places in Africa where
she could have. Elephants have been pushed out of so many
places where they used to be found and squeezed into small
sanctuaries. To have to break with tradition, abandon wellknown home ranges, give up old migration routes, and crowd
into a restricted area must be stressful. Both inside and outside
parks and reserves, most African elephants are pursued for their
ivory and the older elephants are always the first to be killed
because their tusks are bigger. In the few areas where poaching
is under control, elephants are culled for a variety of reasons,
usually “for their own good.” Whole family units are killed from
the matriarch down to the littlest calves, with only a few calves
between one and three years old saved to be sold to zoos. As
painful and agonizing as her death was, I would still prefer that
Teresia died in the way that she did rather than be killed “cleanly,
efficiently, and painlessly by a bullet” in a culling scheme in which
she would have lost her whole family, all her female descendants,
most of her genes, nearly everything she had lived 62 years for.

LIFE CYCLE AND DEATH

Looking back over Teresia’s life provides an opportunity to
review the full life cycle of a female elephant. When Teresia
was born around 1922 she weighed about 260 pounds and
stood approximately two feet nine inches at the shoulder. Her
brain weighed 35 percent of what it would weigh as an adult.
(The human brain is 26 percent of its adult weight at birth;
most other mammal brains are 90 percent of the adult weight
at birth.) She had a lot of mental and physical development
ahead of her.
Teresia probably spent the first four years of her life in very
close proximity to her mother and her siblings and other
relatives in the family. She depended on her mother for both
milk and care. When she was around four years old, a younger
sister or brother was most likely born and Teresia was weaned.
At four she would have taken great interest in her new sibling
and lavished it with attention. At the same time she was
developing her own social relationships within the family and
learning elephant protocol. As a young calf she would have
been tolerated in most situations, but as she got older she had
to learn about dominance and aggression as well as affiliation.
She would also have begun to know elephants from other
families and her own family’s position in relation to them.
The years from 4 to 12 or 13 were probably by elephant
standards fairly carefree. Teresia was growing, learning, play¬
ing, and developing friendships and bonds. I am sure there
were many bright-green, sun-hlled days when Teresia and the
other youngsters in her family and bond group were able to “be
silly.” I can imagine them racing about, beating through bushes
and tall grass, heads up, ears out, eyes open wide glinting with
mischief, or running across the open pans in the “floppy run,”
letting forth wild, pulsating play trumpets. On the best days
everyone joined in, even the adults.
Starting sometime in her ninth or tenth year Teresia’s body
began to go through changes and in her eleventh or twelfth
year, if conditions were adequate and there was not a drought,
she probably came into estrus for the first time and experienced
all the confusion, fear, and excitement of that event. She may
or may not have conceived on that occasion. If she did not she
probably came into estrus again a few months later and most
likely conceived then. Her body went through further changes

265

266

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

as the fetus grew and various hormones went into action. Her
breasts filled out gradually over the months. By the time she
was 18 months pregnant her sides were bulging and the weight
of the fetus slowed her down. She probably had to feed more
than before, because she, as well as the fetus, was continuing to
grow. At her age she was only about two thirds the size of a
full-grown adult female.
At 13 to 14 years old Teresia probably gave birth to her first
calf. Most likely she would not be in synchrony with the other
females in the family and she may also have given birth out of
the main birth season. Given the odds for first calves, this one
may not have survived, especially if it was a marginal year in
terms of rainfall. But in a good year and in a close-knit family,
it could very well have lived beyond its first year. Born around
1935, it would have been 49 the year Teresia died. She had no
living daughter that old and there were only one or two big
bulls of that age. I suspect that animal died somewhere along
the way.
If her first calf lived out its early years, then Teresia would
have come into estrus again when it was about two and given
birth to a new calf when it was four and she herself was 17 to 18.
For the next three decades of her life Teresia was either
lactating or pregnant or both, as she would continue to suckle
her youngest calf until the next one was born. If she gave birth
to her first calf when she was 14 and had a calf every four years
until she was 49, when Tolstoy was born, she could conceivably
have had ten surviving calves. If she had her first calf at 12 and
had a few very short calving intervals of only three years, then
she might have had 11 calves in those years. After 50 Teresia’s
breeding slowed down considerably. We know that she did not
produce a calf for nine years, and then gave birth to her final
calf when she was 58. That one did not survive.
In those middle years, when she was reproductively most
active, important social changes were also occurring. Whoever
was matriarch when she was born, possibly her grandmother,
would have died and the next-oldest female taken over. This
may have happened two or three times before Teresia herself
was the oldest female and therefore the matriarch. I know that
she was the oldest female in 1964 because among the photo¬
graphs that Norman Myers took there were several complete

LIFE CYCLE AND DEATH

rolls of film on the Ts. They were standing in a group resting
under some trees and he photographed them from all angles.
Teresia was easily recognizable and she was definitely the
biggest female there. Thus she must have been matriarch of
her family and the senior member of the whole bond group for
at least 20 years.
I think it could be said that in the last decade of her life
Teresia was in her old age. I do not know if elephants become
senile. Teresia always seemed to have all her faculties intact.
She stayed with her family, continued to interact with them,
and was as tolerant and sweet-natured as she was when I first
knew her. Teresia must have been a particularly caring and in
some way attractive grandmother because Theodora’s calf
spent far more time with her than with his own mother. In
those last two years, whenever I saw the family, he was often
following Teresia or standing next to her. He would go to Theo
to suckle but then would return to Teresia. If I had not known
the family I might have thought it was her calf. She also
continued to maintain a close relationship with her strapping
son Tolstoy, who was 13 years old and showed no signs of going
independent up till the time she died. Thus, although slow and
possibly not leading the family in the way she must have when
she was younger, Teresia was still a vital part of the family in
her old age.
I would estimate that 65 is probably about the oldest age an
elephant can reach in the wild. By then the teeth would be
completely worn down and malnutrition and its related diseases
would follow. The famous Kenya elephant Ahmed of Marsabit
mountain died in this way, although he was only 55; but he had
an abscess under the molar on one side of his jaw and he could
chew only on the other side. The molars on his chewing side
were worn away to nearly nothing, while the other two were
untouched. I saw pictures of him before he died; he was gaunt
and emaciated. Postmortem examinations revealed no disease
other than the abscess. He had probably died of starvation.
Very few elephants live out their full lifespan. The single
greatest cause of death is killing by man, whether it be
poaching, hunting, or culling. Natural mortality results from a
variety of causes. As I have shown, mortality can be high among
young calves in drought years. Again, this type of mortality is

268

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

linked to nutrition. Once a calf becomes about five years old its
chances of survival are much higher. There then seems to be a
second small rise in mortality around the age of independence
for males. We do not know how they die, but it seems to be a
time of vulnerability for them. They may be more likely to be
speared or poached, but in Amboseli we do not have direct
evidence that this is occurring, only that young males are dying
at a higher rate than would be expected. After this age natural
mortality levels out to about 3 percent per year for adults.
In Amboseli most elephant deaths are a result of drought or
spearing, but some animals have died of other causes. We know
of several accidents that have resulted in death: breaking of legs
and falling into pits and wells. And Joyce saw one of the
Amboseli elephants, Polly, fall over and die, and the sole thing
she could find was two bleeding puncture wounds on one of her
legs. She could only conclude that a snake had bitten her. It
must have been a large puff adder, black mamba, or cobra to
get through the skin and inject enough venom to kill her. Other
elephants have appeared to die of disease. We have never had
a veterinarian working on the project and have no facilities for
doing postmortem examinations (a formidable task with an
elephant) and thus we cannot explain the deaths of some of the
elephants. Anthrax has been suggested, as has blocked intes¬
tines.
In areas where dead elephants have been examined, a variety
of diseases have been found. Abscesses of the tusks, teeth, and
jaw were frequent ailments. Sylvia Sikes, working on culled
elephants in Uganda, found cardiovascular disease in adults.
Calcification of the blood vessels was the most common condi¬
tion. There were also fatty deposits in the arteries. Both
conditions could lead to heart attacks or strokes. Working
elephants in Asia are known to die from both.
Elephants seem to suffer rarely from any contagious epi¬
demic diseases such as rinderpest, which has a devastating
effect on the cloven-hoofed animals. However, in Lake Manyara National Park, a disease did sweep through the elephant
population, killing over 100 animals. It was thought to be
pneumonia-related. Anthrax is a contagious disease, but usually
only one or two elephants succumb and only those in poor
condition already. Rabies has been recorded in Asian elephants,

LIFE CYCLE AND DEATH

as have foot and mouth disease, tetanus, tuberculosis, pneumo¬
nia, dysentery, and something called elephant pox, which is
related to chicken pox. All these diseases may be a result of
domestication.
In Amboseli elephants sometimes suffer from a condition I
have called the “twisting disease.” It usually occurs in the wet
season to one or two elephants at a time, and it does not seem
to spread through a family. It affects calves over the age of
about five, adult females, and males up to about 25 years old.
The symptoms are a general stiffness of the limbs, an odd
carriage of the head, and a bizarre way of walking. The malady
causes the body to twist as the elephant moves. As far as I know,
elephants do not die of twisting disease. They seem to get over
it within a few weeks and then return to normal. I have always
suspected that the condition is caused by a virus that affects
motor coordination. On the other hand, it may be caused by
some plant that these individuals have eaten. Many plants have
toxins of one sort or another and can only be ingested in small
quantities.
Blood tests have shown that African elephants carry a variety
of parasitic diseases such as trypanosomiasis and tick fever,
both caused by protozoa. Microfilariae parasites have also been
detected in the blood, but it is not known what diseases they
may cause. Various other internal and external parasites are
common in elephants. They are hosts to several different kinds
of worms in the guts, stomach, lungs, and bile ducts. Elephants
also suffer from ticks and botflies. None of these parasites
seems to kill elephants directly, although they could hasten the
decline of an elephant that is ill from something else.
While elephants that are ill do not go off to an elephant
graveyard to die, the myth is not without some foundation.
Probably in any given elephant range there are places that sick
and wounded elephants tend to go. These would be areas
where there is water and shade and soft vegetation to eat. In
Amboseli sick elephants often come to Ol Tukai Orok, the
woodland where my camp is situated. Dotted about this wood¬
land are small swamps. Elephants who can no longer travel stay
close to these swamps in the shade of the big Acacia xanthophloea
trees. Places such as this might have more carcasses than other
parts of a population’s range, and therefore people may have

269

270

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

thought there was a special area where elephants went to die.
More likely the myth arose from hunting practices that involved
killing several elephants at the same time. One tribe in southern
Africa used to kill whole herds of elephants by building a ring
of fire around them. In this case the bones of many elephants
would have been found in one place.
Elephants may not have a graveyard but they seem to have
some concept of death. It is probably the single strangest thing
about them. Unlike other animals, elephants recognize one of
their own carcasses or skeletons. Although they pay no attention
to the remains of other species, they always react to the body of
a dead elephant. I have been with elephant families many times
when this has happened. When they come upon an elephant
carcass they stop and become quiet and yet tense in a different
way from anything I have seen in other situations. First they
reach their trunks toward the body to smell it, and then they
approach slowly and cautiously and begin to touch the bones,
sometimes lifting them and turning them with their feet and
trunks. They seem particularly interested in the head and
tusks. They run their trunk tips along the tusks and lower jaw
and feel in all the crevices and hollows in the skull. I would
guess they are trying to recognize the individual.
On one occasion I came upon the carcass of a young female
who had been ill for many weeks. Just as I found her, the EB
family, led by Echo, came into the same clearing. They stopped,
became tense and very quiet, and then nervously approached.
They smelled and felt the carcass and began to kick at the
ground around it, digging up the dirt and putting it on the
body. A few others broke off branches and palm fronds and
brought them back and placed them on the carcass. At that
point the warden circled overhead and dived down in his plane
to guide the rangers on the ground to the dead elephant so that
they could recover the tusks. The EBs were frightened by the
plane and ran off. I think if they had not been disturbed they
would have nearly buried the body.
Even bare, bleached old elephant bones will stop a group if
they have not seen them before. It is so predictable that
filmmakers have been able to get shots of elephants inspecting
skeletons by bringing the bones from one place and putting
them in a new spot near an elephant pathway or a water hole.

LIFE CYCLE AND DEATH

Inevitably the living elephants will feel and move the bones
around, sometimes picking them up and carrying them away
for quite some distance before dropping them. It is a haunting
and touching sight and I have no idea why they do it.
When an elephant dies in Amboseli we let it rot for a while
and then collect the lower jaw for aging. The jaws are often still
smelly so we put them out in the sun on the periphery of the
camp. Without fail these hold a fascination to all passing
elephants. Recently one of the big adult females in the popu¬
lation died of natural causes and we collected her jaw after a
few weeks and brought it to the camp. Three days later her
family happened to be passing through camp and when they
smelled the jaw they detoured from their path to inspect it. One
individual stayed for a long time after the others had gone,
repeatedly feeling and stroking the jaw and turning it with his
foot and trunk. He was the dead elephant’s seven-year-old son,
her youngest calf. I felt sure that he recognized it as his
mother’s.
I have often wondered if elephants experience anything akin
to grief when a close family member dies. Certainly the death of
an important animal such as the matriarch has a profound
effect on the family. There can be total disintegration of the
group for a long period afterward, with some families never
resuming their former cohesiveness. I have seen females whose
young calves have died looking lethargic for many days after¬
ward, sometimes trailing along way behind their family. They
had shown no signs of illness before the calves died so it may be
that they were “depressed” in some elephantine way.
Unfortunately for all of us, elephants and researchers alike,
1984 proved to be a year in which the themes of drought,
disease, death, disaster, and depression were paramount. If
1976 had been a bad year for the project, 1984 far surpassed it.
To start with and underlying many of the problems, there was
the total failure of the long rains. To compound the difficulties
severe financial cutbacks in the Wildlife Department meant that
the park did not have the money to pump water out to the
Maasai, nor could they maintain the boreholes. There was no
choice: The Maasai were allowed to come into the park for
water and eventually, as the drought intensified, for grazing as
well.

272

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

,

As in 1976, competition for the remaining resources was
acute. To aggravate matters the Maasai had begun to circumcise
their young men and initiate them into the warrior class as
moran, which meant that incidents of spearing increased. The
combination of factors spelled disaster for the elephants. In
1984, 67 elephants died, a number second only to the mortal¬
ities of 1976. The deaths started slowly with the loss of two of
the ’83 calves in February and March, both the first calves of
young females, making their deaths not unusual. One elephant
died in May, three in June, six in July, and one in August. But
then the drought began to take its toll and in the next four
months over 50 elephants died. Many of them were calves who
suffered poor nutrition or the loss of their mothers, but there
were also many adults who were speared, with only a few dying
of natural causes. In all, 11 adult females, 13 adult males, 3
juveniles, 13 weanlings, five second-year calves, and 22 firstyear calves died during 1984.
For once I did not envy Phyllis and Keith being in the held
while I was writing in Nairobi. It was a very difficult year for
them. They were the ones who kept finding dead, sick, or
speared elephants. Phyllis had to watch her babies grow thinner
and thinner and one by one disappear. She and Keith were the
ones who had to console their Maasai friends and help them
with deliveries of beans and maize meal. (In parts of Kajiado
district, Maasai children were dying and one of Kenya’s aid
organizations had to set up a relief center.) They even collected
money to buy the diesel to pump water to the Maasai who were
up on the ridges, and they tried to get spare parts for the
boreholes. But as the drought progressed, their efforts seemed
hopeless.
I remembered how on edge I had felt during the 1976
drought, and I worried about Phyllis and Keith, who were both
of a volatile nature anyway. They came through it without
breaking down, but Phyllis said she came close to it the day she
found little Fritz, Freda’s five-year-old son, dead and looking
like a macabre pin cushion from being speared over and over
again in what must have been a gruesome massacre by a gang
of moran. Keith held his temper most of the time, although on
one occasion he vented all his frustration and anger at a tour
leader who had driven his vehicle to the top of Observation

LIFE CYCLE AND DEATH

Hill, at the base of which, in order to prevent soil erosion, there
was a sign asking people not to drive up. Seeing the car up
there made him snap and he was outrageously abusive to the
tour leader, who in turn got exceedingly heated himself. When
I heard about the incident I sided with Keith completely and
understood exactly why somethingJike that would make him so
angry. When one cares a great deal about a place—its animals
and its habitats—and one witnesses it undergoing such terrible
changes during a drought, the added insult of human destruc¬
tion by someone who should know better can easily set one off.
In the meantime, I was not immune from the disasters of
1984, even in Nairobi. A whole series of difficult and unpleasant
incidents occurred. It was definitely a year that made one
reassess one’s work and life in Africa. However, I never
seriously considered leaving. I cared too much about the
project and the elephants. In fact, in strictly scientific terms,
1984 was a valuable year. We learned a great deal about
mortality patterns in elephants. Keith collected important data
on elephant feeding ecology under drought conditions, in
contrast to his earlier study under favorable conditions. Phyllis
was able to assess various crucial factors in calf development
and survivorship. And I confirmed my 1976 hndings on the
effects of deaths and droughts on the behavior and social
relationships of elephants.
One of the things I was interested in was how individual
families fared during the drought. In 1976 some families
obviously suffered more than others, and I wondered what
factors were involved, whether it was the area they lived in or
their status in a possible dominance hierarchy among the
families, or a combination of both. The results were not
clear-cut and they were often contradictory. In 1976 the Ts
came through the drought with no losses at all. I speculated
that they had done well because they lived in one of the richest
parts of the park and because they probably benefited from the
leadership of their older matriarchs. In 1984 the T bond group
was one of the hardest hit of all.
It started in May with the disappearance of Tania. During
the briefest of rains Keith found the Ts over in the western part
of the park and Tania was not with them. On the next sighting
Phyllis found Tania’s ’83 calf, plus Tom and Toby, with

273

274

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

Tuskless, but there was still no sign of Tania. Keith and Phyllis
began to search for Tania’s carcass both on the ground and
from the air, but with no luck. The ’83 calf, who was just over
a year old, stayed with the TAs but Phyllis sadly watched her
grow weaker and weaker until she died in July. Around this
time they finally found Tania’s carcass. She was only a couple
hundred yards from the main lodge garbage pit. Since the
carcass was over two months old, it was difficult to see if there
had been any wounds. We thought it was much more likely that
she had eaten something in the garbage that killed her.
Needless to say, we found this very upsetting and continued
to try to get the lodge and the Kajiado County Council to make
their garbage pits elephant-proof. Keith began to collect all the
things we found in elephant dung: plastic bags and gloves,
medicine bottles, broken glass, bits of metal, and various kinds
of wrappings and containers. It was distressing to find these
things littered over the park and to know that they had passed
through the digestive tract of the elephants. He hoped to
appeal to the various people in charge by showing them these
things, but no one seemed to care. Eventually all the researchers
in Amboseli chipped in to have the smaller Ol Tukai garbage
pits rebuilt with steep sides and wire grills on top like the pit we
had in our camp. With this system the baboons and vervet
monkeys were also kept out. Keith designed the pits, organized
the labor, bought the grill work in Nairobi, and transported it
to Amboseli. The situation improved greatly. Unfortunately
the lodge garbage pit was too big to rebuild.
So Tania and her C’83 died from what we called “garbagerelated causes” on our mortality lists. In the meantime, Teresia
had been speared at Namalog in June, making three losses
among the Ts. It was not to end there. The drought began to
be severe in September and got worse and worse through
October and into November. The spearings also stepped up
with so many Maasai in the park, plus the new moran. Not only
were adults being speared but calves as well. Calves who had
been weaned and were weakened by the drought, as Audrey
had been in 1976, left their families and stayed near the
swamps. Whenever we went out we now found calves on their
own. They were an easy target for moran with nothing better to
do. We lost twelve calves who were four to five years old.

LIFE CYCLE AND DEATH

Significantly, all but two of them were males, further substan¬
tiating Phyllis’s theories on differences in survivorship between
sexes. Males, needing more food because of their faster growth
rate, probably weakened sooner than females and separated
from their families. They then either were speared or died of
malnutrition.
Some elephants also appeared to die of disease during the
drought, probably through illness brought on by their poor
condition. In October Keith and Phyllis came across Tia,with
just her C’83 in the Ol Tukai Orok woodlands. She looked ill
and lethargic. They saw her a few more times still on her own,
and on October 17 they found her dead and her calf gone.
The calf was never seen again and must have died shortly
after she did.
Once again I was very disturbed to hear this news. I had
closely followed the lives of the Ts for 11 years and I felt the
loss of Teresia, Tania, and Tia intensely. I also knew the
families would never be the same again. First of all, with the
death of Tania the TBs no longer existed as a family. Tania left
only her two sons Toby and Tom and no female to carry on.
Toby was ten and old enough to be independent but Tom was
only five and at a vulnerable age. After Tania’s death Tom
wandered around either on his own, with the TAs, with other
family units, or with other calves who had separated from their
families. He had been weaned in 1983 when Tania had her new
calf, but I worried about him nonetheless, given the record of
young males his age.
I was also concerned about Tio, who was only four and a half.
He too had been weaned, but he seemed far less independent
than Tom. Tia’s older son Tad was eight years old and I
thought he would be all right.
At the beginning of November Phyllis and Keith came to the
end of their projects and left Amboseli with a mixture of
sadness and relief. The drought was still in progress and they
were strung out and tired from their work and from the whole
situation in Amboseli. At the same time they did not want to
leave the elephants, whose lives they had become so wrapped
up in. Joyce was starting a new project on the bulls and also one
on elephant vocal communication. She would take over some of
the monitoring until Sandy Andelman came to work on the

276

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

cows and calves after finishing her Ph.D. Sandy, like Phyllis,
had been lured away from the vervets by a fascination with
elephants. Meanwhile I tried to spend more time in Amboseli to
keep up with the deaths that were still occurring.
After Phyllis and Keith left, Joyce and I recorded 36 deaths
in November and December. Some of them, particularly the
males that Joyce found missing, probably occurred earlier in
the year, but the majority of them took place in those final
months. Among the animals that died then were Tio and Tad.
Phyllis saw both Tio and Tad on November 1, just before she
left. I saw Tio once in November with the EBs, but after that he
was not seen again. I never saw Tad after Tia’s death and I do
not understand why he died. He was eight years old; he was not
dependent on his mother for nutrition. He probably could have
stayed with the rest of the TCs, or possibly he could have joined
his older brother Right Fang. I have to suspect that Tia’s death
affected him in such a way as to make him more vulnerable to
the drought.
Another factor may also have increased Tad’s chances of
dying after the loss of his mother. He was born in 1976. I was
fascinated to find that as a set or cohort of animals those calves
that were born during the drought in 1976 fared badly all
along, even years after that drought occurred. Of the 29 calves
that were born that year, 14 died when they were less than a
year old. Of the remaining 15, only 6 are alive today and 3 of
these were born in December 1976, after the drought was
over. It would seem that an adequate diet in its first year is
crucial to the health and strength of an elephant for the rest of
its life.
I found those trips to Amboseli in November and December
very depressing. Each time I went out, there were more animals
missing and presumed dead. The bad luck and difficult times I
was experiencing in Nairobi seemed to follow me to Amboseli
as well. In September it was decided against my own feelings of
loyalty that Masaku and his brother Mwanga should retire.
Masaku was not happy unless I was there, and Phyllis and Keith
found him more and more exasperating to deal with. I agreed
because I could see that the situation was bad for everyone. I
contacted all the past and present sharers of the camp and we
put together a large lump sum of money for Masaku’s retire-

LIFE CYCLE AND DEATH

ment. The final reckoning and parting were extremely distress¬
ing for me. Among other things, I felt that it was the end of an
era in Amboseli and that the camp would never be the same
again.
After Phyllis and Keith left, Marc Hauser, who was working
on the vervet project, joined the camp. Marc is a lively, bright
academic, who is also an excellent French cook (he is American
but his father is French). Together we found a new worker,
Peter Kumu Ngande, to take over Masaku’s duties. Peter
worked out very well and is still with us, but it is true that the
camp is different.
The final blow for me in 1984 occurred on December 8.
There was a ferocious wind storm in Amboseli that afternoon,
and one of the large acacia trees in the middle of the camp
snapped off about ten feet from the ground and pivoted just
enough to fall directly on my Land-Rover and tent, crushing
both beyond repair. Fortunately no one was hurt. I was in
Nairobi; otherwise I almost certainly would have been killed.
Peter was in the kitchen but only a few minutes before he had
been in my tent zipping up the windows in anticipation of the
rain to come. Marc, who had been out working, came back
shortly afterward and experienced the full horror and shock of
the scene when he drove around the corner and into the camp.
He was very upset and immediately drove to Ol Tukai to try to
get in touch with me. He managed to reach me by radio-phone
that evening.
I very rarely cry, but I sat sobbing on my bed after talking to
Marc. It had been difficult enough giving up my research
permission, moving to Nairobi, and visiting the elephants for
only short periods. Then retiring Masaku had been sad and
distressing. Now it seemed that what was left of my life in
Amboseli was destroyed. I had been very fond of that old
Land-Rover. I had gently cared for it for nine years and knew
all its foibles and idiosyncrasies. I had spent some of the
happiest days of my life sitting in it watching elephants. It was
very painful to realize that I would never again drive out of
camp in it, and never sit in it again surrounded by peaceful,
accepting elephants who had grown to know it so well.
Aside from the sentimental aspects, which had the most
immediate impact, there was the financial side and the serious

278

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

problem of having no transport in Amboseli. I still needed a
tent and vehicle to carry on my work as coordinator of the
project. I had very little money left in the AWF Amboseli
Elephant Project account. Ironically, I had recently spent most
of the remaining funds in the account to fix up the Land-Rover
in the hopes that I could keep it going for another few years. It
was 17 years old and it had needed a considerable amount of
work. I had it panel-beaten and completely resprayed; I had
new cushions, seat covers, window channels, springs, shock
absorbers, an exhaust system, a battery, and new tires fitted; I
had the electrical system overhauled and many smaller things
repaired or replaced. I had spent $1,700. I could not claim
anything back on insurance because, being such an old car, it
was only third-party insured, and even if it had been compre¬
hensively insured the company would not have paid because a
tree falling is considered “an act of God.”
The tent was ripped in several places and after nine years in
Amboseli the canvas was too fragile to sew. The protective
thatch roof was smashed and had to be dismantled. Perhaps the
saddest thing of all was that we had to cut down the two other
big trees in the center of the camp. These two trees were nearly
dead anyway. It was the living tree with leaves on it that fell,
probably because it offered more resistance to the wind.
I could not face the Land-Rover and the trees, and spent
Christmas somewhere else for the first time in many years. I
flew down to Amboseli on December 28 and stayed in the study
tent that Phyllis had donated to the project when she left. I was
able to drive the small Suzuki pickup that she had used, which
was temporarily being stored until Sandy came to start her
work. The camp looked stark and bare and bright to me
without the trees, and the wrecked Land-Rover and all the
other debris—broken glass, smashed wood, rotting thatch, and
thorns and branches from the felled trees—depressed me. I did
not enjoy the stay but it was important to get out and census the
elephants before the end of the year.
Joyce and I also had to “do” the vegetation plots. Neither of
us is an ecologist and we dreaded the slow and tedious work
involved in monitoring vegetation. Keith had set out these plots
to determine the availability of food for the elephants during
the two rainy and two dry seasons in each year. It was data we

LIFE CYCLE AND DEATH

all needed and so we agreed to keep up the monitoring after he
left. This was our first time to do it. To start with we had to find
the 12 plots, which were scattered in the various habitats
throughout the park.
Each plot consisted of a transect line delineated by two stones
100 meters apart. We had to find the first stone by a combina¬
tion of memory and Keith’s map and then take a compass
reading to find the second stone. A few of them were easy; most
were extremely difficult, with rocks buried in tall grass or
hidden among bushes. Once we found the rocks we ran a string
out from a special winder that Keith had made. The string was
marked off at two-meter intervals, giving us 50 points along the
line at which we had to take measurements. Keith had designed
a metal frame with ten vertical rods. We had to measure how
many of these rods hit a piece of grass or herb and then
measure the height of the vegetation. That made over 500
individual measurements per plot.
We set out on December 29 to start the plots. We did two the
first day, two more the next day; and on the third day, New
Year’s Eve, the final disaster of 1984 occurred. This one,
however, was amusing. Joyce and I left early, determined to get
six plots done. We ound the first with no trouble and quickly
finished it and then drove to one of the swamp-edge plots,
where the bush was fairly thick. It was a dangerous place and
Keith warned us to be careful there. It was a favorite spot of
lions, buffaloes, and elephants. We found the hrst rock, made
a compass reading, and set off in the direction of the second
rock, whistling and clapping our hands to try to scare any
unfriendly animals away. We did not come across any animals
but we also could not find the other rock and wandered
around, crawling under bushes, getting scratched by thorns,
and cursing Keith. Eventually we found it, ran the string out,
over, around, and under the bushes and began taking the
measurements. We were three quarters of the way along the
line when we heard the unmistakable flap of an elephant ear.
Unfortunately, we could not see anything, since we were
surrounded by bushes well over our heads. We went back to the
vehicle and climbed on top of it. Coming along in our direction
was a cow/calf group. We drove the car to the end of the line
and very quickly tried to finish the transect. As the group got

280

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

closer I stood on top of the car to warn Joyce when to run. Just
as she started to (rewind the string, another elephant came
along behind her and I shouted for her to come quickly. She
had to abandon the winder and string and sprint for the car.
We both stood on top of the car watching the cows and calves
approach the beginning of the transect. We could see that it was
the DB family, led by Delia and Deborah. We hoped that they
would just pass by or over the string, but no such luck. Daniel,
Deborah’s seven-year-old son, found it first and stopped short
in horror. (Elephants notoriously “dislike” anything new and
foreign in their home range; much to the annoyance of park
wardens they almost always knock down signs unless they are
surrounded by a huge barrier of rocks.) After the initial
surprise Daniel approached the string, grabbed it in his trunk,
lifted it, and pulled on it and then rapidly began winding it
around his trunk like spaghetti around a fork. He turned
arofind and backed into the string and wound some more
around a back foot. We could not help but laugh. By now the
others had joined him and also began pulling on the string.
Even the big females took part in the game. Suddenly at our
end of the line, Joyce spotted the little black marker dots
flashing past, followed by the winder rapidly bouncing along
the ground and over bushes toward the elephants. The whole
group of elephants, with string wound around limbs, trunks,
and tusks, went off behind some other bushes and stayed there
for another ten minutes, apparently playing with the string and
winder. Eventually they moved on to the swamp.
Joyce and I cautiously got down from the car and began
assessing the damage. We found at least ten different sections
of broken-off string, some caught up in branches, others simply
in knots. We collected these but knew it was hopeless to try to
piece them together again. What we really wanted to retrieve
was the winder, which was specially designed for the work.
Keith had taken a great deal of care and time making it from all
sorts of scraps and bits and pieces. We searched for nearly an
hour and could not find even a piece of it. We dreaded having
to write and tell Keith. Nevertheless we still thought the whole
thing was extremely funny and kept laughing every time we
thought of Daniel winding the string around his trunk or the
winder bouncing and skipping by us. The next day we did not

LIFE CYCLE AND DEATH

think it was quite as humorous when we went out with a new
string and a primitive winder that consisted of merely a stick. It
made the whole process even more tedious, but we—and later
Joyce and her new assistant, Nellie Sakawa—managed to finish
the plots in the first few days of the New Year.
In the meantime, 1984 did not come to an end without the Ts
experiencing yet another disaster. Titus, Masaku’s 22-year-old
son, who was also working as one of our research assistants,
reported to me in early December that Tilly’s ’83 calf had a very
stiff right hind leg. When I saw the calf on December 28 his leg
was badly swollen and he could not put any weight on it. It
bulged out at the joint and looked as if it was dislocated or
broken. It was pitiful watching him trying to move along on
three legs, clearly in pain. We thought it was just a matter of
time before he died. I suspect he received the injury by falling
into the big garbage pit, so it looked as if yet another T was lost
to garbage-related causes.
The Ts had suffered so many losses in 1984 that I almost felt
that they were jinxed. I hoped that 1985 would bring them
better luck. There had been only one birth among the Ts in
1984: Tuskless had a female calf on March 20. In total there
were seven deaths—Tania, her C’83, Teresia, Tia, her C’83,
Tio, and Tad—and two young males, Toby and Tolstoy,
became independent. Reduced by eight, the three remaining
families numbered 21 animals at the end of 1984:
ta

tc

Tuskless (62)
C’84
Tuo (80)

9
$
8

Tonie (67)
C’82
Tilly (70)
C’83

9
8
9
8

Tom (79) [ex-TB]

8

Slit Ear (36)
C’83
Slo (80)
Tabitha (76)
Tara (67)
C’82

9
9
9
9
9
8

281

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

td

$
2

Tallulah (63)
C’83
Tao (80)

+o +o +o

Tess (63)
C’82

Theodora (67)
C’82

$
6

\

Omptar XI

Future Generations
1985-1986 and Beyond

cE^lit Ear lifted her head, flapped her ears, then folded them
horizontally and lunged at Gladys, jabbing her in the backside.
Gladys sprinted away, uttering a groaning bellow. Tara came
up beside Slit Ear, flapped her ears, and rumbled, but Slit Ear
ignored her. They both resumed feeding.
The TCs were in an aggregation of about 45 elephants in
Longinye. The other T families were not present. Slit Ear’s
family was small now, consisting of only eight animals: Slit Ear,
her C’83, Slo, Tabitha, Tara, her C’82, Tess, and her C’82. The
families they were with were all larger: The GBs, of which Gladys
was a member, contained 17 elephants and they formed a close
bond group with another family there, the IBs, with 13 animals.
The IBs’ matriarch, Isis, was big, close to the same age as Slit Ear.
And the fourth family there, the LBs, was led by another big
female, Leticia. Still, Slit Ear asserted her dominance over them
all, and while she was feeding and moving through the aggre¬
gation, the other cows and calves gave way to her, discreetly
moving out of her path with a wary look over the shoulder.

285

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

The four families remained together, feeding throughout
the morning and stopping to rest and dust at midday. In the
afternoon the TCs gradually drifted away from the aggregation
and headed west toward the Ol Tukai Orok woodlands. They
moved slowly, feeding as they went, but when they reached an
open short-grass plain they formed a line with Slit Ear in the
lead and Tess at the rear and walked with a deliberate, long
stride. They crossed the plain and then the main road and then
a nearly bare pan and entered the woodland.
Here they met up with the TAs and Tom but there was no
exchange of friendly greetings. Instead, Slit Ear folded her ears
at Tuskless and Tonie, walking rapidly toward them. They
moved smartly away rumbling, and one of them gave a short
trumpet of alarm. Slit Ear approached in an aggressive posture
again and once more Tuskless and Tonie hurried away. A few
minutes later Tara suddenly swung around toward Tom and
tossed her trunk at him. Tom gave a groan-scream and ran
away. She did it again and he bellowed, although she never
touched him.
The two families did not stay together for long. The TAs
circled back the way they had come and Slit Ear led her family
on through the woodlands and out to the south into the lava,
toward the mountain. She did not stop and call or listen for
other elephants. The eight animals spent the night feeding and
resting. Of the adults Tara stayed closest to Slit Ear. Tess kept
her distance, especially when they were feeding.
In the morning they moved back toward Ol Tukai Orok,
stopping to rest in a patch of consimilis on the plain to the south
of the woodland. While napping in the morning sun, Tara
suddenly lifted her head and listened. She rumbled very low
and with ears out listened again. This time she emitted a
louder, more throaty rumble. She and Tess began to secrete
from the temporal glands and turned toward the south. Slit Ear
did not respond.
Two minutes later Tara and Tess rumbled, listened and
rumbled again. Another three minutes passed and a small
group of five elephants appeared on the plain to the south. It
was Tallulah and her two calves and Theo and her calf. They
walked steadily, coming straight for the TCs. The four young
adult females, plus nine-year-old Tabitha, came together and

FUTURE GENERATIONS

greeted each other with raised heads, flapping ears, and a few
rumbles in a friendly but subdued ceremony. Slit Ear did not
participate at all, although her five-year-old daughter, Slo, ran
over to greet Tao, her age-mate. The two calves entwined their
trunks and placed them in each other’s mouths. Tess’s threeyear-old daughter cautiously approached these older calves
and was fondled and touched and inspected by both of them.
Tara’s and Theo’s male calves almost immediately began a
sparring match, neither of them having had another male of
the same age to play with for several days.
Slit Ear did not display any aggression toward Tallulah and
Theo, as she had with Tuskless and Tonie, but she also showed
little interest in them. She continued to rest while the others
were socializing. Eventually the five TDs settled down to nap as
well, but unlike in former times they did not stand bunched
together with the TCs. Instead, they stood off to the side,
forming a distinct group of their own. About 15 minutes later
Slit Ear woke up, stretched, urinated and defecated, gave a
perfunctory “let’s go” rumble, and set off toward the wood¬
lands. All the others followed.
In the months after the deaths of Teresia, Tia, and Tania in
1984 I watched with some dismay the profound effect those
losses were having on the social fabric of the T bond group.
Without Teresia, the TCs and TDs disintegrated and frag¬
mented. Tallulah and Theo were rarely with Slit Ear and they
were sometimes not even with each other. Slit Ear’s own family
broke down much of the time, with Tia going off on her own
until her death in October. Afterward I often found the TCs
split up into two or even three groups.
Some of this behavior can be attributed to the drought,
during which many families splintered into mother-calf sub¬
units, but the TCs and TDs had been through an equally bad
drought in 1976 and had stayed together. Even after average
rains fell in 1985 the bonds between the two families did not
seem as strong as in the past. Each of the families itself
coalesced again but I still found the two families separated on
several occasions, whereas before it was a rare event to find
them apart. Intuitively, I felt that the bond that had held the
TCs and TDs together so consistently was the relationship

288

,

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

between Slit Ear and Teresia. For whatever reason the alle¬
giance between them was exceptionally strong. Without the
attraction that Slit Ear and Teresia had for each other a
realignment and shift of loyalties occurred.
Far more striking was the change in the relationship between
the TAs and the other two T families. I think there must have
been a strong bond between Slit Ear and Torn Ear, and a barely
weaker one between Teresia and Torn Ear. The data on
association patterns before 1977 suggest that there was. How¬
ever, once Torn Ear died, the affiliation between the families
diminished. Possibly there were some residual bonds between
Tania and the other older generation of females, but then she
died too, leaving only the young TA females. Slit Ear appar¬
ently felt no attraction to them and actually appeared to
discourage close contact. It was on January 2, 1986, that I saw
her acting antagonistically toward Tuskless and Tonie and
watched Tara tossing her trunk at Tom. Thus, by the beginning
of 1986 I could barely justify calling them members of the same
bond group. In fact if I had started my study in 1986 I would
never have guessed that the TAs had a special relationship with
the TCs and TDs. They spent little time together, they rarely
greeted one another, and Slit Ear was antagonistic toward
them, hardly the right atmosphere for bonding. Still, the
history of their relationship was there in the records and I
could not dismiss the possibility of further changes and realign¬
ments occurring.
I cannot help but wonder what the Ts’ history was before my
time and what events and factors brought about the relation¬
ships between Slit Ear and Teresia and Slit Ear and Torn Ear.
Was something forged in Slit Ear’s childhood? Was Teresia her
older sister or her aunt? Did Torn Ear care for her when she
was a small calf? Did the bonds persist because of a consistency
in behavior, a knowledge that they would always help each
other? And what about the simple factor of time? All evidence
indicates that Slit Ear had spent most of her life in the company
of Teresia and probably a great deal of time with Torn Ear as
well. Could shared experiences over the years maintain and
cement the bonds? Do elephants really never forget?
I cannot answer those questions. I can only watch Slit Ear
now and try to interpret her behavior. Although she does have

FUTURE GENERATIONS

her daughters and her family around her, she seems different
to me. I have not done a quantitative study of her social
activities but my impression is that she has displayed more
aggressive behavior and far less affiliative behavior in the time
since Teresia died.
I am curious, though, to see what will happen when Slit Ear
dies. She is the last of her generation. When Teresia died, Slit
Ear was 48 years old. As I write this now, she is 51. All the
remaining females in the three T families are less than half her
age. Tuskless is the oldest, but only 25; Tess and Tallulah are
24; Tara, Theo, and Tonie are 20; Tilly is 17; and Tabitha is
11. They are the new generation. The bonds they have formed
and that continue to develop will determine the social cohesive¬
ness within and between the families. There appear to be fairly
strong ties among these younger females. Perhaps when Slit
Ear dies they will reestablish closer affiliations and spend more
time together. For the time being Tuskless leads her little
group, Slit Ear is the dominant figure in her family, and
Tallulah has definitely become the matriarch of her family.
Although I would have liked to have followed the liyes of the
Ts more closely in the two years following the deaths of 1984,
I was by necessity writing in Nairobi for much of 1985 and 1986
and did not see the Ts often. In general it appears to have been
a relatively uneventful period for them, a respite from the
horrors of 1984 and a time of recovery.
When I did see them, each time I was surprised to see that
Tilly’s ’83 calf, who had broken his leg, was still alive. It was sad
to see him hobbling along. His leg was withered and there was
a huge swollen knob at the top joint. Yet he was feeding well
and he was fat. Tilly slowed her own pace or always waited for
him to catch up. One day I was touched to see him playing with
a calf from the SA family. They pushed and butted one another
and I am sure he was at a disadvantage but he was sparring with
spirit and verve.
In September 1985 I saw Teddy with a hugely swollen penis
and sheath. My colleagues Joyce and Sandy had noted it a week
earlier and they thought he might have been bitten by a snake.
Miraculously, after several weeks he recovered. The other T
“boys” all seemed to be doing well: Right Fang, Tim, and Toby
spent much of their time in and around the camp. Unfortu-

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

nately Toby was addicted to human foods and prowled around
Ol Tukai at night, knocking over garbage cans and walking
right up to the verandas and windows of the bandas. Even we
had some trouble with him when he tried to knock our kitchen
down several times toward the end of the dry season of 1986. I
had a small electric fence put up around the kitchen and that
seemed to discourage him. Teresia’s son, Tolstoy, went from a
family member to independence very rapidly after his mother
died. I often saw him on his own, with other young males, or on
the periphery of family groups. As he was growing older his
resemblance to Teresia was striking. With his long, almost
straight tusks, I think he will be a very handsome male when he
reaches his prime.
During 1985, 65 females were recorded in estrus, and no
doubt others were missed, which led to a mini baby boom in
1987. Among those who were seen in estrus in 1985 was Tonie.
She was in consort with and seen mated by Bad Bull in July. In
May 1987 another calf almost certainly fathered by Bad Bull
entered the T bond group. Once more the relationships were
labyrinthine because this calf was the half brother or sister to
Slo and possibly others in the TCs and TDs on the male side
and was the cousin, niece, and sister or brother to others on the
female side. In April 1986 ten-year-old Tabitha came into
estrus and was mated by Pablo. In October 1986 I noted that
Tess was looking fat and was probably pregnant. Thus it seems
that many new little Ts are coming into the world. I only hope
they are able to live out their lives relatively undisturbed in an
atmosphere where the full range of their behavioral and social
repertoire can be played out. I have my doubts and I worry a
great deal about their future.
Amboseli’s elephants are apparently safe for the next two or
three years, but beyond that I honestly cannot say what will
occur. Events affecting Africa’s elephants on a larger scale
across the continent will eventually impinge on the Amboseli
elephants. Ivory poaching, loss of habitat, and culling schemes
loom on the horizon. All these factors are inexorably working
against the future existence of a relatively natural elephant
population such as Amboseli’s.
The most acute and immediate threat to the future of
elephants in Africa is the ivory trade. Ivory is no doubt a

FUTURE GENERATIONS

beautiful substance. It has an incandescence and warmth unlike
any other material used for ornaments or sculpture. But I
always feel that people forget that ivory is the tusk of an
elephant. The word ivory disassociates it in our minds from the
idea of an elephant. One tends to lump it with jade, teak, ebony,
amber, even gold and silver, but there is a major difference:
The other materials did not come from an animal; an ivory tusk
is a modified incisor tooth. When one holds a beautiful ivory
bracelet or delicate carving in one’s hand, it takes a certain leap
of understanding to realize that that piece of ivory came from
an elephant who once walked around using its tusk for feeding,
digging, poking, playing and fighting, and furthermore that
the elephant had to be dead in order for that piece of ivory
to be sitting in one’s hand. I would venture to guess that only
a tiny percentage of people who buy ivory ever make that
leap. Even if they did they would probably buy ivory anyway in
the all-too-common belief that there are plenty of elephants
in the world, possibly too many, and in any case they are here
for the use of man.
Trade in ivory has been going on for centuries; as a conse¬
quence, elephant populations have fluctuated and in many
instances have been exterminated. Approximately a thousand
years ago North Africa’s elephants were wiped out for their
ivory. (It was from this population that Hannibal obtained the
elephants that he used to cross the Alps in c. 219 b.c.) In South
Africa there were only a few small pockets of elephants
remaining by the nineteenth century after a period of intensive
and unchecked ivory hunting. And in West Africa most ele¬
phant populations had been eliminated by the turn of this
century. A few remnants, many of only 20 to 30 animals, were
left dotted about. In eastern Africa elephant populations were
drastically reduced in the nineteenth century because of the
conjunction of the ivory trade and slavery. The two trades fed
on each other as the ivory traders captured men and women to
carry tusks to the coast for shipment and then sold the people
into slavery. At the height of the ivory trade, approximately
1,000 tons of ivory were being exported to Europe every year.
In the early twentieth century some colonial administrators
became alarmed by the rapid depletion of elephant popula¬
tions. Laws were instituted on the hunting of wildlife and

292

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

reserves were set aside where animals were protected. As a
result elephant populations began to recover and increase in
eastern, central, and southern Africa. However, rapid human
population growth in West Africa caused a further decline in
that region’s elephants. The ivory trade continued, with the
major importing activity shifting from Europe to eastern Asia.
For half a century, the volume of ivory traded stayed at a
relatively low level, with prices remaining stable until the 1960s.
However, in the late sixties, the price of ivory, which had long
been approximately $2.45 per pound (or at that time about one
British pound per pound of ivory), began to increase. For a
variety of reasons which can only be guessed at, ivory once
again became a popular form of hard currency. By 1973 the
price had risen to nearly $14 per pound and by 1978 it had
reached $35 per pound. Even taking inflation into account, the
real value of ivory was six times higher in 1978 than in 1960.
Some suggested factors behind the upsurge in the trade were:
the increased availability of elephants, which were once again
numerous in areas where they had formerly been nearly wiped
out; the unstable political situation in some countries that had
recently gained independence; the increasing human popula¬
tions, with subsequent conflict between elephants and man; and
the general chaos in the money markets caused by the skyrock¬
eting prices of oil, suddenly making ivory a valuable and stable
commodity.
The demand for ivory has increased even further in the
1980s and today the price is over $50 per pound. The total
trade in raw ivory per year is presently around 825 tons. Big
money is involved. The trade in raw ivory is worth at least $50
million a year and the trade in carved ivory is worth $500
million a year. Japan is the biggest importer (523 tons in 1983),
with virtually all the ivory marketed internally. It is used to
make signature seals, which the Japanese prefer to writing out
their names, jewelry, decorative carvings, and netsukes, which
are worn on kimonos. A smaller proportion goes to other Asian
countries and to Europe, and about 10 percent remains in
Africa, where ivory carving is a rapidly growing industry in
several countries.
These facts and figures on ivory, even in my mind, tend to
distance one from the elephant, but ivory statistics do not

FUTURE GENERATIONS

represent the harvesting of so many trees or the mining of a
quantity of ore; they represent a definite number of dead
elephants. Of course, some elephants die of natural causes and
their tusks are collected to be sold by the wildlife departments
or central governments involved. However, natural mortality at
this point cannot possibly feed the current demand for ivory.
To meet the demand for 825 tons of ivory per year a minimum
of 70,000 elephants have to die. (This figure is based on the
recently recorded average tusk weight of approximately 13
pounds and an average of 1.8 tusks per elephant, which
accounts for one-tusked and broken-tusked animals.) And that
is only the elephants with tusks; thousands of calves also die
because of the loss of their mothers, bringing the estimated
total up to at least 80,000 elephants each year. Africa’s ele¬
phants, currently estimated at 800,000, cannot possibly sustain
that level of offtake.
The total number of elephants in Africa and the effect that
the ivory trade has been having on them have been issues of
hot debate among conservationists and people with an interest
in the ivory trade in recent years. From 1981 until only
recently, the ivory lobby had convinced even many con¬
servationists that the trade in ivory was having no significant
effect on the overall number of elephants in Africa. Today it is
clear that this view did a great deal of damage to attempts to
conserve elephants. The indisputable evidence coming in from
across Africa is so disturbing and so overwhelming that there
is no longer doubt in anyone’s mind that Africa’s elephants are
being killed at an unsustainable rate. The most recent figures
reveal that they are declining at 5—10 percent per year
depending on the region.
Iain Douglas-Hamilton has been involved in surveying the
status of elephants throughout Africa since 1976 for the IUCN
(International Union for the Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources). From 1976 to 1982 he was chairman of the
IUCN/Species Survival Commission’s African Elephant Group
and later he continued his surveys as a consultant. He published
a summary of the African elephant’s status in the January 1987
issue of the conservation journal Oryx. In all but a few countries,
whether in parks and reserves or not, elephant numbers are
declining. The only notable exceptions are South Africa, Zim-

293

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

babwe, Botswana, and Malawi, where elephant numbers are
either increasing or remaining stable.
Some areas are experiencing far more drastic declines than
others. There is a crescent of intensive elephant poaching
which stretches from the Central African Republic, through
Chad, Zaire, southern Sudan, and Somalia. To give a few
examples:
Central African Republic
Iain carried out aerial surveys of the Bamingui-Bangoran and
Manovo-Gounda national parks in 1985 and discovered an 80
percent decline since the previous count in 1981. In 1976 there
were an estimated 80,000 to 100,000 elephants in the country.
The 1985 estimate was 10,000 to 15,000.
Chad
Before the outbreak of civil war in Chad, the overall elephant
population was estimated at 15,000. The latest estimates suggest
that fewer than 2,000 remain.
Sudan
Gangs of 60 and more poachers with automatic weapons have
all but wiped out southern Sudan’s elephant populations.
Somalia
Aerial surveys in Somalia have revealed far more carcasses of
elephants than live elephants and one observer believes that
there may be only a few elephants left there now.
In other areas of Africa large numbers of elephants were
exterminated in the previous decade and in some cases the
slaughter continues. Again just a few examples:
Uganda
In the 1970s, during Amin’s reign and the chaos of civil war,
80-90 percent of Uganda’s elephants were killed. In Murchi¬
son Falls (South) National Park, where accurate aerial counts
have been made for many years, there were 9,970 elephants in
1973; nine years later, in 1982, there were only 25 left.

FUTURE GENERATIONS

Kenya
In 1974 Kenya’s elephants were estimated at 167,000. By the
end of the seventies 100,000 were gone. Today there are
estimated to be only 35,000—40,000 and recent reports indicate
that renewed intensive poaching is under way again.
Tanzania
Ivory poaching in Tanzania only began to be severe in the late
seventies, but it has been virtually out of control in the eighties.
In the Selous Game Reserve in southern Tanzania Iain counted
110,000 elephants in 1976, making it one of the last strongholds
for elephants in Africa. In October 1986 he did another count
and found only 55,000 elephants there.
It is not the numbers alone that are depressing; equally
disturbing is what has happened to the populations that remain.
Poachers systematically take the animals with the largest tusks,
so the first to go are the males and the older matriarchs (the
Japanese carvers prefer large tusks and actually pay more
money per pound for large tusks than for medium and small
tusks). When the older elephants are finished they start on the
medium-sized ones and eventually have to do with young
elephants with very small tusks. Not surprisingly, the average
tusk weight exported from Africa has dropped significantly in
the last few years. According to the Wildlife Trade Monitoring
Unit of the IUCN, the mean tusk weight of ivory imported into
Japan dropped from 35.8 pounds in 1979 to 21.3 pounds in
1982. In some of the most heavily hunted populations it
appears that only young animals remain. Iain recently recorded
mean tusk weights of ivory confiscated from poachers in
Uganda and the Central African Republic at 5.9 pounds for
Uganda and 6.6 pounds for the CAR. Elephants with tusks in
that weight range would be no older than seven or eight years.
Overall, the average tusk weight of recent export records is
about 13 pounds, which would be an adult female or a teenage
male. In fact, it is estimated that the majority of the tusks
presently in the trade are from females in their reproductive
years.
What these data on mean tusk weights reveal is that most

295

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

elephant populations are being seriously overexploited. To
fulfill the demand for the 800-plus tons that are needed for the
trade, the suppliers have to kill more elephants each year.
Where ten years ago possibly 40,000 elephants with an average
tusk weight of over 20 pounds could fill that need, today, with
much younger populations, as many as 70,000 elephants must
be slaughtered. Each year more elephants with smaller tusks
will be needed to satisfy the trade. The average age of the
populations will get younger and younger and inevitably less
productive.
My work in Amboseli, as well as the work of others on social
organization, mating behavior, calf development, and popula¬
tion dynamics, indicates that a population consisting of only
young animals under constant stress cannot possibly reproduce
and raise calves at even an average rate. The most productive
and successful elephant mothers are those in their middle
years, between 25 and 45 years old. Even under good conditions
the calves of teenage females have a higher mortality rate than
those of more experienced females. Under heavy poaching
pressure with leaderless, fragmented families, the calf mortality
rate is bound to increase. I would further predict that the
conception rate would decrease from stress and in the absence
of older musth males. In a relatively undisturbed population
elephants can increase at 3-7 percent per year, but it would be
unlikely that a young, harassed population could breed at
anywhere near this rate.
The situation is depressing but it may not be irreversible.
There are people working very hard to halt the downward
trend. Iain Douglas-Hamilton continues to labor unflaggingly
to try to make the public aware of what is happening to
elephants. Others have joined the battle. The chairmanship of
the combined IUCN/SSC African Elephant and Rhino Special¬
ist Group (AERSG) passed on to Jonah Western in 1982, and he
initiated some valuable studies, particularly those dealing with
the ivory trade and with modeling the various harvesting
methods for ivory. He also instigated a study and survey of the
forest elephant in Central Africa and helped influence Sudan
to ban the sale of ivory. In 1985 David Cumming of Zimbabwe’s
Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management be¬
came chairman of AERSG and he too has worked extremely

FUTURE GENERATIONS

hard to try to halt the decline of both rhinos and elephants.
Not only conservationists are concerned. African govern¬
ments, realizing that they were losing revenue and a natural
resource to poachers and illegal traders, approached CITES
(Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora) officials and requested an ivory quota
system, which has been in operation since January 1986. A
special ivory unit of the CITES secretariat in Lausanne, Swit¬
zerland, is now able to monitor the international trade in
registered tusks. All legally traded ivory must be marked and
accompanied by CITES documentation and cleared through
their office. Theoretically, since the exporting nations of Africa
and most of the major importing countries have signed CITES,
it should be possible to keep track of all the tusks on the market,
from source through the various intermediaries to their final
destination. In practice there are still many loopholes, and the
decline in elephants has continued unabated since the quota
system was instituted.
In an attempt to approach the problem from the importing
end, Esmond Bradley Martin, an American geographer, has
been carrying out a project that has opened up a dialogue
between conservationists and ivory dealers. Martin has visited
all the countries that import ivory in any substantial quantity.
He has found in many cases that the ivory traders and carvers
themselves are aware that they may be out of business in a few
years if some changes are not made. He has had a fairly positive
response in Japan, where the Ivory Division of the Japan
General Merchandise Importers’ Association contributed funds
toward the setting up of the ivory unit in Lausanne.
Basically what the ivory traders want is a sustained yield of
tusks coming from Africa each year. Ironically, to achieve this
goal by far the best solution would be, for most areas of Africa,
not to kill any elephants at all. This highly interesting conclu¬
sion has come from computer simulation modeling carried out
by Tom Pilgram, a statistician, and Jonah Western. Taking all
the information available on elephant population dynamics—
numbers, age structures, reproduction and mortality rates—
and on growth rates of tusks, Tom and Jonah came up with
various “harvesting” models. They then compared their differ¬
ent models with the data on tusks that have passed through the

297

298

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

ivory trade in the last few years. The one that fits the present
trade figures is one that takes more and more elephants each
year from a younger and younger population in order to
produce a constant total weight of ivory. In this model elephant
populations decline and crash to local extinction. Tom and
Jonah predict that this simulated result could become reality
for at least half of Africa’s elephants within a decade.
In another model, the same number of elephants are killed
each year and eventually the population stabilizes but at a
younger age, which results in the total ivory harvest declining
and mean tusk weight remaining low. The model that would
eventually produce the most ivory and the biggest tusks would
be one in which no elephants were hunted for the foreseeable
future, populations were allowed to recover, and, most impor¬
tant, could reach older ages and die of natural causes. This
somewhat unexpected conclusion comes about because tusks
continue to grow throughout an elephant’s life, and in males
the rate of growth speeds up in the last decade of life.
It is unrealistic to expect a moratorium on the killing of
elephants or even a moratorium on trade. With $500 million
involved someone will always find a way to get ivory out of
Africa. Attempting to control the ivory trade is truly a huge
task, given the political and social climate in Africa. The
political situation in many of these countries is so precarious
that almost any control is out of the question. Elephants in
countries engaged in civil war are particularly vulnerable.
Iain Douglas-Hamilton has completed a valuable investiga¬
tion of the relationship between the increase in sales of auto¬
matic weapons to African countries and poaching for ivory. In
his recent Oryx article he reports that according to the U.S.
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency the value of arms
imports to Africa increased (in real terms, taking inflation into
account) from $500 million in 1971 to $4,500 million in 1980.
In the same period armed forces in the East African region
increased from 141,000 to 441,000. In general, where there has
been increased importation of arms there has been more
elephant poaching. In some cases the armies themselves have
been the main poachers, as was the case with, for example,
Amin’s troops in Uganda. In other cases civil wars are being
partially financed by ivory poaching. In yet other countries the

FUTURE GENERATIONS

mere availability of automatic weapons, which have easily
found their way into private hands, has changed the equation.
In many areas where government antipoaching forces have
previously been able to keep poaching in check in national
parks and reserves, they are now powerless to oppose wellorganized and far better armed gangs.
In countries that are not at war, the major problem is
corruption of officials. It is a simple matter for a customs or
wildlife officer to fill in and sign the CITES forms making
poached ivory legal. If that is not possible illegal ivory can be
sent out through the central African country of Burundi, which
is not a signatory of CITES. Burundi exports most of the ivory
coming out of eastern Africa although it has no elephant
population itself. The tusks come from poached elephants in
Zambia, Tanzania, Zaire, Uganda, Sudan, Kenya, and even
farther afield. The tusks are sent on to the United Arab
Emirates, which is the only country in the world that has ever
signed and then withdrawn from CITES. With Burundi and
the UAE free of any controls, corrupt officials in the African
countries with elephant populations will always have a market
for poached tusks.
Trying to tackle widespread corruption in African govern¬
ments is too formidable a task for conservationists, but the
corruption within the wildlife departments might be reduced if
more financial and moral support was given to national parks
and reserves. While many elephant populations still exist
outside their boundaries, in the end it is in the so-called
protected areas that conservation efforts in Africa will have to
be concentrated. But with a few exceptions the wildlife depart¬
ments operate on minimal budgets, and wardens and rangers
are pitifully underpaid and underequipped. When the price of
one pair of tusks is equivalent to an officer’s yearly salary, the
temptation to poach is overwhelming. We in the developed
countries could help Africa’s conservation areas by contributing
far more to their maintenance. It would be a crime to future
generations to stand by and let parks and reserves continue to
deteriorate. If war and anarchy, greed and corruption cannot
be avoided, lack of funds is remediable. There are many, many
African people who care a great deal about their wildlife and
some have lost their lives trying to protect it; but their countries

299

300

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

are poor and revenue that may have been generated by wildlife
often has to be used for health or education, or, unfortunately,
arms. In any case, the burden of wilderness protection in Africa
should not be placed exclusively on the backs of the African
people—these areas and their wildlife are the world’s heritage.
I, of course, have to ask myself what all this means for
Amboseli and the elephants whose lives I care so deeply about.
Sometimes I try not to think about it because at the moment in
Amboseli there are no gangs of 60 men carrying AK 47s and
mowing down every elephant with tusks. But I also know it
could happen, given the right set of circumstances. Kenya is a
stable, peaceful country; but if there was serious political unrest
or civil war in Kenya or neighboring Tanzania, Amboseli’s
elephants would represent a quick source of revenue for
buying arms. Until ivory poaching becomes too costly to the
hunter because of danger in coming up against well-armed and
well-trained rangers, or because the selling of illegal ivory
becomes difficult, or because the price of ivory goes down
through lowered demand, Amboseli’s elephants will never be
safe from the threat of poaching.
What I feel is needed now is a worldwide campaign to reduce
the demand for ivory. I would ask people not to buy ivory until
a time comes when one can be sure that the tusk is either from
an elephant killed legally or from one who died of natural
causes. I know that the stores carrying ivory in the United
States claim that they buy only ivory that was procured legally.
Yes, the ivory may have entered the country legally, with all the
correct papers, but the overwhelming chances are that it left
Africa under suspect arrangements. It is currently estimated
that a minimum of 80 percent of the ivory traded today is from
poached elephants.
While ivory poaching is the overwhelming threat to Africa’s
elephants, two other major threats also have to be considered.
Not as immediately acute as poaching but in the long term just
as perilous to elephants is the problem of population growth
and the concomitant expansion of people into wilderness areas.
Elephant ranges are shrinking every day while Africa’s human
population is growing prodigiously. In Kenya, which has the
highest recorded birthrate in the world, at close to 4 percent
per year, the population, last censused at 15 million in 1979,

FUTURE GENERATIONS

will double by the year 2000. Where will all those people go?
Less than one third of Kenya’s land is arable. The rest is
semidesert, uninhabitable except by only the toughest of no¬
madic pastoralists. Nearly 7 percent of Kenya is gazetted as
national parks and reserves, which is high. However, in some
areas people live right up against the boundaries of parks and
are petitioning their members of parliament to degazette the
parks in order to let them graze their cattle or cultivate crops
inside. It may just be a matter of time before the government
has to give in to their pleas. On the other hand, tourism is
Kenya’s second-largest foreign-exchange earning industry, ex¬
ceeded only by coffee. It is in the interest of the country as a
whole to maintain its conservation areas, but hungry, landless,
unhappy people cannot be ignored. The problem is one that
only the Kenyans can solve.
Changing patterns of life-style and land use among people
are also affecting wilderness areas. Around Amboseli, because
of population growth, the Maasai are gradually shifting to a
mixed agricultural and pastoral economy. Previously the Maa¬
sai could manage a subsistence existence based solely on
traditional pastoralism if they had approximately ten cows per
person. Now there are more people and the land they range
over can sustain only four cows per person. The Maasai have
little option but to enter the money economy to supplement
their diet with agricultural products. I am not trying to imply
that the Maasai should have stayed traditional pastoralists or
that the change is necessarily a bad one, but there is no doubt
that the change is accompanied by a different attitude toward
wildlife. Wild animals, particularly elephants, may be able to
coexist with pastoralism, even a modern form of pastoralism,
but they cannot coexist with agriculture.
Aid organizations are continually trying to get pastoralists to
become agriculturalists or fishermen or whatever, to settle them
in villages and towns and stop their nomadic way of life. There
have been more failures than successes in these attempts—
witness the spreading desertification of the Sahel, attributed by
many authorities to a generation of ill-advised water-develop¬
ment schemes. Yet these organizations continue to try. Many
are run by missionaries who, along with wanting to help
primitive, pagan peoples, also want to convert them and have

301

302

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

them attend church. A nomadic way of life is not conducive to
churchgoing, but encouraging people to settle in a village or
town is.
Presently in the Amboseli area a missionary group is helping
the Maasai with an irrigation project at Namalog swamp, just to
the east of the border of the Amboseli National Park. The
Maasai, as well as people from other tribes, had already settled
and farmed at Kimana swamp farther east, but Namalog had
remained free of agriculture until recently. Now there are
houses, fences, and irrigation channels. (There is also a church.)
How long the Maasai will be able to grow crops at Namalog is
open to question, for the soil may not be suitable and there is a
limited amount of water. In the meantime the new agricultur¬
alists are crying out against the wild animals that try and often
succeed in sneaking into the fields to eat the crops. If this
irrigation scheme is seen as a success, then it is only a matter of
time before the people in the area start to look longingly at the
two big swamps—Longinye and Enkongo Narok—within the
park.
However, it would not appear to be in the national interest to
turn Amboseli over to agriculture. Amboseli has the highest
gate receipts of any park in the country. Each acre of that park
is worth far more each year to Kenya as wilderness than it
would be under agriculture or ranching. Nevertheless, at least
some individuals in the government are aware that local people
living on the periphery of national parks and reserves have to
benefit from those areas in order to tolerate and encourage
wildlife. Without their cooperation a small park like Amboseli
could not survive.
Since the 1950s, schemes to help the local Maasai realize the
potential benefits from wildlife have been tried, some with
more success than others. From early on the wildlife authorities
have tried to provide water for the Maasai in the peripheral
areas in order to leave the central viewing area free of cattle.
When the status of Amboseli changed from a reserve to a
national park, a water pipeline was built for the Maasai and
other promises of revenue and assistance were made. Most of
the benefits proved to be short-lived or never forthcoming. The
pipeline was of inadequate design for the number of cattle in
the area, and then it was shut down completely because of lack

FUTURE GENERATIONS

of funds to buy fuel for the pump. At the same time, the
boreholes that the Maasai had been using for many years were
no longer maintained and the Maasai found themselves with no
water except for that in the swamps. New conflicts arose, with
the Maasai justifiably angry because the government did not
fulfill its promises.
The Maasai also lost important revenue in those years.
Before Kenya declared a nationwide sport-hunting ban in
1977, the Maasai received hunting fees from people who
wanted to shoot on their land. These fees were considerable; in
the final year before the ban came into effect the group ranches
surrounding Amboseli received 1.6 million Kenya shillings
(about $225,000) from hunting licenses, mostly for buffaloes,
antelopes, zebras, and birds. Although I never want to shoot
any animal myself, I am not against sport hunting because it
brings revenue to the people who have to live with wild animals,
and taking a few trophy animals each year apparently has little
detrimental effect on wildlife populations.
The Amboseli Maasai also received benefits in the form of
grazing compensation based on the numbers of animals migrat¬
ing onto their ranches in the wet season. These payments lasted
for five years after the park became operational in 1977 and
then were suspended. A proportion of the revenue from the
lodges goes to the Kajiado County Council, which is then
supposed to put the funds back into the area in the form of
cattle dips, schools, and other development projects. Unfortu¬
nately, Kajiado is 100 miles away and the councilors have more
pressing needs nearer home. Very little appears to get back to
Amboseli.
As I write this, relations between the Maasai and the park
could be a great deal better. Work on an improved pipeline has
not yet begun. There is no longer any grazing compensation or
revenue from hunting. The only direct benefits the ranchers
receive are from the public campsite, from special camps used
by luxury tented safari companies, and from the sale of
firewood to the lodges and camps. A lot more could be done.
The Maasai could be helped to be successful livestock ranchers
by combining their traditional knowledge of semiarid environ¬
ments with some modern production expertise, enabling them
to participate more fully in the money economy. After all, they

303

304

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

«

have done very well with cattle, sheep, and goats in the last
2,000 years or so. With better marketing facilities (the closest
major cattle market is 50 miles away) and help with improving
their stock, they could be important suppliers of beef to the
nation.
Allowing and encouraging the Maasai to fulfill their aspira¬
tions in a way that incorporates their knowledge and many of
their traditions is essential. Without the tolerance of the Maasai,
the elephants have little chance of surviving, much less of living
a relatively undisturbed existence in a naturally functioning
ecosystem. The Maasai are a part of that ecosystem, and even
though they are changing I believe some sort of mutually
beneficial coexistence can be achieved.
The third major threat to Amboseli’s elephants, possibly even
an immediate one, is culling. “Culling” or “cropping” is the
killing of a certain proportion of a population of animals for
goals ranging from a simple reduction of numbers to full-scale
game ranching at maximum sustained yield. The question
whether to cull or not arises from and is answered by man’s
view of nature, natural resources, and conservation. On the
whole man places himself above nature and thinks of nature as
there to be exploited for the benefit of mankind as man thinks
best. Exploitation may be consumptive (killing and eating
animals, felling trees for timber, harnessing water for energy)
or nonconsumptive (aesthetic appreciation of nature for recre¬
ation, scientific study). Man decides and controls.
The conservation of nature is generally accepted as a positive
goal. Most plant and animal species (with the exception of those
species that are inimical to man—weeds, tsetse flies, locusts,
mosquitoes) are considered worth saving from extinction, ei¬
ther for ethical reasons or for the more utilitarian view that we
do not know what value they might have for man in the future.
To save species and their habitats, land has been set aside for
conservation in countries throughout the world and conven¬
tions have been signed to prevent the overexploitation of fish
and mammals in the sea.
Africa is acknowledged as one of the few remaining places on
earth where large areas of wilderness containing a great
diversity of plant and animal life still exist. No other continent
has its variety and abundance of large mammals. For these

FUTURE GENERATIONS

reasons Africa has been a focus of conservation activity. In most
African countries, parks and reserves have been created, many
of them after the nation gained independence. Over the years
growing numbers of people from more developed countries in
both the East and the West have visited Africa’s protected areas
to see the wildlife and to benefit in some way from getting
“close to nature.”
For the people involved in the creation and maintenance of
protected areas, there is always the problem of how to manage
the park or reserve. What and how is man supposed to protect?
The demarcating and gazetting of a protected area with
boundaries and in some cases fences or ditches brings about
some change no matter how big the area is. Is the area intended
to be kept as it was when set aside, a capsule in time and space
of a “representative fauna and flora”? Should natural animal
and vegetation cycles be allowed to be played out? Should
tourism be the prime objective? Or conservation? Or scientific
research? Or maximum total revenue from all possible sources?
The policies toward protected areas in Africa run the gamut of
attitudes from preservation to consumptive utilization, and the
methods employed range from hands-off nonintervention (the
so-called laissez-faire approach) to intensive management.
At the laissez-faire end of the spectrum are those who believe
that Nature (always with a capital) knows best, and left to
herself she will take care of the habitats and the animals.
Toward the other end of the spectrum is the attitude that once
man has stepped in and created artificial boundaries, stopped
hunting by local people, and built roads and hotels, a place is no
longer natural and it can no longer take care of itself. Ecological
processes have been disrupted, and animal and plant popula¬
tions are no longer capable of self-regulation within acceptable
limits. It is then man’s responsibility to control and manage that
protected area by regulation of animal numbers, burning
schemes, the introduction of artificial watering points, and so
forth. Somewhere in the middle but definitely closer to the
laissez-faire view are those ecologists who see ecosystems as
complex collections of interacting organisms shaped under the
forces of natural selection, which they are just beginning to
understand. In their view ecosystems show considerable resil¬
ience in the face of disturbance; and in the absence of biological

305

306

ELEPHANT MEMORIES
«

understanding, management “tampering” in natural or semi¬
natural systems very often fails to have the desired effect or, in
some cases, may make matters worse.
With such a broad range of views on how to manage parks
and reserves, it is not surprising to find that the topic has
generated a great deal of controversy, of which Kenya has had
more than its share. The Kenya government policy regarding
national parks does not dictate intensive management, but on
the other hand the policy is open to a variety of interpretations.
Sessional Paper No. 3 of 1975, “Policy on Wildlife Management
in Kenya,” states that national parks are managed exclusively
for four objectives:

1. To preserve in a reasonably “natural” state examples of
the main types of habitat which are found within Kenya for
aesthetic, scientific and cultural purposes;
2. To provide educational and recreational opportunities
for Kenyans;
3. To provide an attraction for tourists and so serve as a
major basis for Kenya’s economically profitable tourist in¬
dustry; and
4.

To sustain other activities not in conflict with the above.

The paper also states that agriculture, pastoralism, forestry,
and consumptive wildlife uses are not allowed in national parks.
Nevertheless, the terminology is imprecise enough to allow
arguments for the killing of animals in order to preserve the
habitats in a “natural” state. And it is in this context that the
long-standing debate about elephants and trees comes up.
Elephants feed on trees and in doing so they sometimes kill
trees or alter their form of growth markedly. This is generally
viewed by people as being “bad.” In some areas elephants have
reduced woodlands to open grassland and bushland.
The classic examples are Murchison Falls National Park in
Uganda and Tsavo National Park in Kenya. In Murchison Falls
thousands of elephants were killed in the 1960s in a culling
scheme to halt habitat change. (In the next decade over 90

FUTURE GENERATIONS

percent of the remaining elephants were slaughtered by the
army and poachers, but no one could have predicted that at the
time.) In Tsavo a team of scientists, led by Richard Laws, was
recruited in the 1960s to assess the elephant-tree situation and
in order to do so they received permission to kill a sample
number of elephants to determine their population dynamics.
As a start 300 were killed, and the results suggested to the team
that another 3,000 should be killed in order to gather enough
data to determine how many more should be killed to reverse
the woodland changes. The Kenya parks authorities felt that
the killing of so many elephants for scientihc purposes was
abhorrent and in conflict with the stated use of the park and
refused permission. The repercussions and the controversy
surrounding that decision are still being felt today.
There were dire predictions that Tsavo would become a
desert. Elephant numbers had built up both through immigra¬
tion from surrounding areas where elephants were being
pushed out by human expansion and through the elephants’
own reproduction within the park. When Laws and his team
were brought in there were estimated to be 40,000 elephants in
the 7,000-square-mile ecosystem. After they left, some natural
and some man-made events in the next decade changed the
picture drastically. Droughts killed a few thousand elephants,
and intensive poaching killed many more. By the late seventies
only 8,000 to 10,000 elephants remained. Since then, Tsavo’s
vegetation has changed again, with bushes and trees returning
throughout the park.
Neither side in the laissez-faire vs. culling controversy was
happy with what happened in Tsavo. The noninterventionists,
while encouraged by the evidence of habitat regeneration and
resilience, did not see lawlessness and poaching as a solution.
The intensive-management side viewed the outcome as a
terrible waste. If the government, instead of drought and
poachers, had culled the elephants, the country, including local
people, would have reaped the benefit of one of its natural
resources. As it was, the meat rotted in the park and the ivory
was smuggled out of the country.
But what if culling had been allowed in Tsavo? To reduce the
elephants to the point where woodlands were maintained it
very likely would have interferred with a natural vegetation

307

308

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

cycle, which, for example, may proceed over centuries from
grassland to bush to woodland and back to grassland, under the
influence of rainfall, elephant numbers, Are, and other factors.
In addition, culling would no doubt have prevented the ele¬
phants themselves from responding reproductively to the com¬
pression and high densities. Even with the knowledge available
on elephant population dynamics in the sixties, it could have
been predicted that the elephants would have started breeding
faster as soon as the levels of competition were reduced by
culling. (In culling schemes whole family units are killed in an
effort to cause as little disruption to the remaining population
as possible. Under this system families are left intact with their
leaders and their knowledge. Therefore, their ability to breed
would not be adversely affected, as it would be in a poached
population, where the older matriarchs and adult females are
killed in families throughout the population.) The Tsavo
elephants would eventually have been back to their former
numbers and there would have to have been another cull. The
wildlife authorities would have found themselves in a vicious
circle, or as my colleague Keith has put it: Like the Red Queen
of Through the Looking Glass, the wildlife manager would be
running as fast as possible just to stay in one place.
Unfortunately, the specter of culling looms over the heads of
Amboseli’s elephants. Over 90 percent of the mature Acacia
xanthophloea trees in Amboseli have died because of salinity and
a rising water table, possibly accelerated through damage
caused by elephants feeding on the bark. However, it appears
that the older trees would have died whether or not elephants
were present. The current “problem” is that the elephants are
feeding on the young acacias that are growing up in place of the
old trees. Seedlings are snapped off shortly after they emerge
and saplings are pushed over, fed on, and killed. As a result
very few stands of young acacias exist in the park, causing some
people, including Jonah Western, whose interest has always
been in the whole ecosystem, to worry about the park’s habitat
changes.
The number of elephants in Amboseli is known to have
remained relatively stable over the last 20 years. Approximately
650 elephants comprise the Amboseli population today—the
same number as estimated in the late sixties and early seventies.

FUTURE GENERATIONS

Probably that many elephants, possibly more, have been in the
area for the last several hundred years. In those centuries, the
vegetation in Amboseli has apparently gone through various
long-term cycles. Amboseli was known to have been a treeless
waste when the explorer Joseph Thomson passed through
toward the end of the nineteenth century. The trees that have
been dying in the past 20 years were probably established as
seedlings in the early 1900s. Thus we know for certain of one
cycle of tree die-off and regrowth in the last 100 years and we
can speculate that these cycles may have been going on for
hundreds of years.
Nevertheless, Jonah feels that natural cycles can no longer
occur in Amboseli under the present conditions. He is disturbed
that the elephants appear to be spending more and more time
in the central park area and that they are less frequently
migrating out to the bushlands surrounding the basin. By
concentrating in the basin they are feeding more on the young
trees than they otherwise would, thus preventing the woodlands
from regenerating. Unless the elephants change their migra¬
tion patterns or their numbers are reduced, Amboseli will
suffer a sustained loss of its habitat and wildlife diversity. Jonah
has not yet recommended culling. He feels strongly that efforts
should be made to try to reestablish the elephants’ former
migration patterns in order to reduce elephant density in the
park. He has suggested various methods to accomplish this
goal, such as creating a disturbance in the park (for example,
shooting over the elephants’ heads), fencing off part of the
swamps, and allowing livestock back into the park, all in an
effort to force the elephants out of the central area.
Other voices have not been as patient and many people have
approached my colleagues and me about the question of culling
the Amboseli elephants. No doubt the elephants are having a
profound effect on the young acacias, but for how long this
particular effect will continue is very much open to question.
To cull the elephants in order to allow the regeneration of
acacia trees would be a drastic, unreasoned step, given our
present lack of knowledge of ecosystem dynamics.
First of all, in order to have any effect, the reduction would
have to be severe; at lea!st half the elephants, probably three
quarters, would have to be killed. Second, a high proportion of

309

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

the family units that use the central area (where the former
woodlands occurred) would have to be killed. I and others who
have worked on the project predict that the peripheral ele¬
phants would move into the central area as soon as the others
were gone, just as they do every wet season when the residents
move out. Third, the Kilimanjaro elephants are waiting in the
wings. They have become more habituated each year and I
would be greatly surprised if they did not fill the vacuum once
the dominant Amboseli families were eradicated. Amboseli is
much safer than the unprotected forests on Kilimanjaro.
In the meantime the Amboseli females who were left would
continue to breed and a combination of births and immigration
would bring the population back to where it started in a
relatively short time. Maybe this would give the trees time to get
a foothold, but can it possibly be worth the disruption caused by
the shooting of several hundred elephants in a tiny park the
size of Amboseli? The park is famous for its relaxed and highly
viewable elephants. Tourists would not be pleased to see piles
of rotting carcasses and skeletons and very frightened or
possibly aggressive living elephants. And the social structure of
the population would be shattered by the loss of so many
families. Each clan and most bond groups would be profoundly
affected. And what if the trees did not recover? Would another
100 or 200 elephants have to be killed? Once intensive man¬
agement is started there is no looking back. One is no longer
dealing with anything resembling a naturally functioning eco¬
system with built-in resilience to environmental fluctuation and
negative feedback systems. Something very precious is lost
along with the elephants that are killed.
Lake Manyara is the only place I know of in Africa where an
“elephant problem” has been perceived and the situation
simply left to take its own course in the absence of culling or
intensive poaching. When Iain concluded his study in 1971, he
predicted that all the mature Acacia tortilis trees would be killed
by elephants in the next ten years if the destruction continued
at the then-present rate. At the time there was some regener¬
ation, but not enough to replace the mature trees. Iain did not
rule out culling but rather recommended the extension of the
park. Eventually a small area to the south was added to the park
but the density of elephants in the acacia woodlands remained

FUTURE GENERATIONS

about the same. After Iain left, the elephant population rose
for five years; but then it fell by about 100 elephants in 1976
because of disease, leaving approximately the same number of
elephants as when he began his study. About this time Rick
Weyerhaeuser carried out a study of elephant-vegetation inter¬
actions in Manyara and made some unexpected discoveries.
First, the elephants had greatly reduced their rate of feeding on
the mature acacias and the die-off had slowed down consider¬
ably; second, the regeneration of young acacias was nearly
rampant. Today Manyara is thick with acacias ten to fifteen feet
high. The “problem” was solved without human intervention,
and a valuable lesson in woodland ecology was learned.
There are many small parks in Africa surrounded by agri¬
cultural activity where animals have to be fenced in and where
a laissez-faire policy would be considered impossible. Neverthe¬
less, I very strongly believe that the goal of conservation should
be to strive to maintain some areas where ecological processes
can continue with the minimum possible influence by man. We
still have so much to learn from these processes, knowledge that
could affect our very existence in the future, that I think it is a
moral necessity to conserve natural ecosystems wherever pos¬
sible.
We also have a great deal more to learn about elephants. To
cull in Amboseli would destroy forever the long-term study of
a relatively undisturbed elephant population. There are not
many places left in Africa where this kind of study can be
carried out, and no other place with free-ranging elephants
whose lives have already been followed for 14 years. This
detailed record of the demographics of an entire population
through time is unique, and it becomes more valuable as each
year passes. The opportunity of developing a true understand¬
ing of elephant population dynamics from the level of the
individual upward is still possible in Amboseli. Those of us who
have been involved in the project are concerned to see it
continue for at least another 20 years, and even then it would
not cover the full lifespan of an elephant.
Against this background of the various threats to and prob¬
lems surrounding elephants, the Amboseli Elephant Research
Project is going on. The camp is still standing, a lovely, peaceful
oasis despite the loss of the trees. As a result of the kind
/

311

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

generosity of friends, acquaintances, and even strangers, I
raised enough money in 1985 to buy a new tent and a new
Land-Rover. But the best thing that has happened to the
project is the addition of two Kenyan assistants, both young
women in their early twenties: Norah Njiraini and Soila Saiyielel. Norah has been with Joyce for two years and Soila, who
began working for Sandy in July 1986, is now employed by me.
They are remarkable in a country that has some fairly tradi¬
tional views about the role of women. They have been trained
by us to carry out the full range of held work. Joyce sent Norah
to driving school in 1986, and until Soila joined us, Norah often
went out by herself in a four-wheel-drive vehicle over rough
terrain, collecting data on musth males for Joyce. She got
charged by huge bulls, got stuck in the mud, had punctures and
breakdowns, but she handled it all with great calm and a
growing self-confidence that was rewarding to watch. Soila has
learned to identify all the adult females and most of the calves
faster than anyone else I know and while Sandy was away she
did the censusing of the families and all the radio-tracking of
two females who had been fitted with radio collars. Just recently
I sent Soila to Nairobi to get her driver’s license as well.
Together Norah and Soila are an efficient team. And they do
the dreaded vegetation plots and never complain. What makes
me happiest is that they love their work and they love the
elephants and are as taken up with their lives as any of us have
been.
As for the main studies, Sandy Andelman has finished her
two-year study of female-female cooperation and competition.
Her preliminary results show that there is a dominance hierar¬
chy among the family units in the Amboseli population and that
factors such as the size of the family, the size of the bond group
and the age of the matriarch influence dominance ranks. The
distribution of the families in the dry season appears to be
determined by both tradition and the relative dominance rank
of the families. Sandy has recently started a comparative study
of the Lake Manyara elephants, something both Iain and I have
wanted to see for a long time.
Joyce is continuing her study of musth. Her original work
generated excitement among all those interested in the rela¬
tionship between hormones and aggression. She now has a

FUTURE GENERATIONS

major grant from the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health
to explore this topic further, as well as funds from the Harry
Frank Guggenheim Foundation, which is concerned with hu¬
man dominance, violence, and aggression. Both organizations
feel that her study can shed light on human behavior.
In addition, Joyce has undertaken a study of elephant
communication. I find this project particularly exciting. As I
mentioned before, Joyce waited for Phyllis and Keith to finish
their studies before she began her research in late 1984. By
luck, at the same time, we were approached by Katy Payne
about vocal communication among elephants. Katy had worked
for 12 years on whale communication, concentrating on the
songs of the humpback whale, and wanted to switch to ele¬
phants. She chose to study Asian elephants, knowing that that
field was less crowded with other researchers. She asked if she
could come and observe us at work for a month in order to
learn about elephants and how to work around them. She also
offered to bring her powerful, highly sensitive recording equip¬
ment with her. We agreed and she came out for a month in
January 1985 and then for another month in February 1986.
In between contacting us and arriving in Kenya for the first
time, Katy made a very exciting discovery. She had gone to the
Washington Park Zoo in Portland, Oregon, to observe a group
of Asian elephants. At first when she was in the enclosure with
the keeper she was disappointed because the elephants ap¬
peared to vocalize very infrequently. However, she soon de¬
tected a throbbing sensation in the air, although she could still
hear no sound. Katy’s experience with whales suggested to her
that the elephants might be making sounds below the range of
human hearing. She went back to Cornell University, where she
is based at the Laboratory of Ornithology, arranged to obtain
special recording equipment, and returned to Oregon with two
fellow workers. After recording both in the daytime and
through two entire nights, they found that the elephants were
communicating with very low frequency calls, most of which
could not be heard by the human ear. The special tape recorder
was picking up the sounds but Katy and the others could not
hear them unless the tape was speeded up ten times.
Human beings can hear sounds in the frequency range from
20-20,000 hertz (a unit of frequency equal to one cycle per

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

•

second), and only people with very sensitive hearing can detect
sounds down to 20 hertz. Some of the sounds the elephants
were making ranged in frequency from 14 to 24 hertz and the
sound pressure levels were high, at 85 to 90 decibels. (Human
conversation is at about 65 decibels; amplified rock music is
around 120 decibels.) The elephants were making very low but
relatively loud sounds. Sound below the range of human
hearing is called infrasound, that above ultrasound. While
considerable work has been done on high-frequency sounds
made by such mammals as bats, shrews, and porpoises, the
elephant was the first terrestrial mammal reported to use
infrasound.
When Katy came to Amboseli she and Joyce spent a month
recording the elephants. The analysis carried out back at
Cornell revealed that free-ranging African elephants also pro¬
duced vocalizations with infrasonic components. Joyce and I
had both suspected that something of this nature was occurring.
We had seen instantaneous coordinated behavior of a group of
elephants which made us think that one animal had given an
alarm call that we could not hear. Katy and Joyce’s recordings
suggested that elephants could easily make an infrasonic alarm
call, but what was more exciting was that they showed that
elephants have a large repertoire of low-frequency calls used in
a variety of contexts.
The discovery of the use of infrasound by elephants was
fascinating in itself, but it also opened up a vast array of new
interpretations of their behavior. Joyce has gone on to work
with her own equipment and is primarily interested in the
content of the vocalizations—that is, the messages that are
being sent. It is known that low-frequency sounds travel over
far greater distances and are less affected by trees and bushes
than higher sounds. Theoretically some of the sounds that have
been recorded in Amboseli (at up to 115 decibels) can carry for
six miles, which could explain the coordination of movement
and behavior of separated elephant groups. Contact calls and
answers no doubt help elephants within families and bond
groups find each other. These and other vocalizations may also
enable elephants to avoid each other. In the intensive radio¬
tracking study that Rowan Martin carried out in Zimbabwe, he
found that families from different clans would often be moving

FUTURE GENERATIONS

toward one another and then when they were two or three
miles apart, they would change course in what appeared to be
deliberate avoidance. In many cases the wind was not in the
right direction to reveal each other’s presence by scent. Lowfrequency sounds may have alerted them.
Another important function of long-distance communication
may be in finding mating partners. Almost inevitably after a
female has been mated she gives a long, loud series of postcopulatory rumbles. These vocalizations contain infrasonic
components. Joyce speculates that they carry over long dis¬
tances and thereby attract males to the estrous female, who
would then have a greater choice as to whom she mates with
during the remainder of her estrous period. Males in musth
make a characteristic rumble which is both very low and very
loud. Joyce thinks that this rumble communicates different
messages to different animals. It may attract estrous females
and warn subordinate males to give a wide berth to the musth
male. Often several males are in musth at the same time, and
Joyce has noted that they manage to crisscross the park in
search of females and yet usually avoid direct confrontations
with each other. Infrasonic communication may very well be
the key element in this spatial arrangement.
The observation of long-distance communication among
elephants that I find most amazing and most disturbing was
made in Zimbabwe. Garth Thompson, a wildlife guide, was for
several years in charge of a private wildlife sanctuary adjacent
to Hwange National Park. In the sanctuary were about 80
elephants whom he watched every day and got to know well.
Generally they stayed in the area around the lodge he worked
from and visited the artificial water holes that were constructed
to enhance viewing. They were very relaxed, habituated ele¬
phants, and tourists in open vehicles could get as close to them
as we do in Amboseli.
Next door in Hwange a very clear-cut policy had been set
down to reduce the total number of elephants by culling in
order to maintain tree densities. Intensive culling has been
carried out each year for several years, with at least 1,000 and
up to 4,000 elephants killed in one dry season. A family is
herded by helicopter or light aircraft toward waiting marksmen
and all the members, except calves of about one to three years

315

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

old, are shot and killed in a matter of a couple of minutes. The
calves are captured for sale to zoos and safari parks. It would be
a clean, quick operation except for the babies, who scream and
mill about and climb over their dead relatives in an effort to
find and stay with their mothers. This system of culling is
thought to least disturb an elephant population and is used in
preference to shooting a few animals from each family. No
doubt it is less disturbing, but the elephants know very well
what is going on and that knowledge appears to be communi¬
cated throughout the population. In his last year in the
sanctuary, Garth’s 80 elephants disappeared on the very day
that culling started in the park 90 miles away. Several days later
he found them bunched together in the opposite corner of the
reserve as far away from the park boundary as they could get.
Somehow the message of danger and death had been relayed to
them across those miles.
The descriptions of culling in Zimbabwe and Iain’s reports
on the rapid decline of elephants because of poaching made me
realize how truly lucky Amboseli’s elephants are. They must be
some of the last elephants on earth who have the freedom and
the relative safety to live their lives to the fullest, surrounded by
their relatives from grandmothers down to the tiniest babies,
dynamically and richly interacting with one another and their
environment.
But I wonder how much longer it will be before the heavily
armed, organized poachers turn to Amboseli. They would
begin by shooting all the fine big bulls, then the younger bulls,
and then the matriarchs and the older females one by one. In
the last few years elephant poaching in Kenya has once more
become rampant, particularly in the eastern part of the country.
Once again Tsavo is under siege; and the very latest estimates
for that park indicate that there may be no more than 5,000
elephants left from the original 40,000. In Amboseli there is
not a trained field force capable of stopping poachers with
automatic weapons. It is thought that the only reason they have
not yet come is the presence of tourists and researchers.
And if the poachers do not come, what of the cullers? I feel
sick when I think of a team of marksmen, skinners, and
butchers moving into Amboseli and slaughtering whole families
along with all their knowledge, their traditions, and their

FUTURE GENERATIONS

memories. The Ts, being a central family who use the acacia
woodlands, would be among the first to be annihilated. It is
almost too horrible to think about, but it is burying my head in
the sand not to. Just the other day a university group to which
Joyce was lecturing told her that they had heard that Amboseli’s
elephants were going to be culled. I am sure this is not true, but
a kind of momentum begins to build as people see the aesthet¬
ically unappealing scene of dead and dying trees and think that
“something” should be done. Killing the elephants seems the
simplest and most direct solution, but only to people who have
not watched individuals over 14 years; have not seen elephants
greet one another with trumpets of joy; seen elephants, adults
and calves alike, running and playing across an open pan in the
moonlight; seen elephants trying to lift and hold up a stricken
companion; seen a female stand by her dead baby for four
days; or seen a seven-year-old calf gently fondle and stroke and
feel the jaw of his dead mother.
Elephants are not so many rodents to be exterminated; they
deserve something better than that and I am not afraid to say
that ethics and morality should be essential considerations in
our decisions for their future. Preserving habitats and trees and
maintaining species diversity are important goals in conserva¬
tion, but nothing will convince me that killing Slit Ear, Tallulah,
and Tuskless and their families would be worth the achieve¬
ment of those goals. The world would not be a better place if
they were dead.
In the last two years I have realized that more than anything
else, more than scientific discoveries or acceptance, what I care
about and what I will fight for is the conservation, for as long as
possible, not of just a certain number of elephants, but of the
whole way of life of elephants. My priority, my love, my life are
the Amboseli elephants, but I also want to ensure that there are
elephants in other places that are able to exist in all the
complexity and joy that elephants are capable of. It may be a lot
to ask as we are about to enter the twenty-first century, but I
think it is a goal worth striving for.

I

Epilogue
December 26, 1986

Ht was the morning after Christmas. Several friends had come
to Amboseli to celebrate the holiday with me. We had had a
huge feast and to everyone’s enjoyment over 100 elephants had
arrived and fed in the glades around the camp. The ones who
came right into the camp were, of course, Tuskless, Tonie,
Tilly, their calves, and Tom, and later Toby, Tim, and Right
Fang. Peter said they had come to say hello to me, that no
elephants had been in the camp for days. Part of me had
wanted to believe him, and I had felt a small warm glow of
happiness.
On this morning I drove out from the camp with one of my
friends at about 8:00 a.m. He is a very keen and knowledgeable
ornithologist and we had decided to go bird-watching. (He
promised to teach me to identify the waders who migrate to
Amboseli from Europe every winter and who drive me to
distraction when I cannot tell a green sandpiper from a wood
sandpiper or a greenshank from a marsh sandpiper.) We were
on our way to the middle of Longinye swamp where there were

321

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

*

open pools of water, but, of course, because I was not looking
for elephants we kept coming upon them.
There had been good rains in November and December and
the park was green and lush. The elephants we met walked with
spirit and energy after nearly two months on a good diet. The
contrast to their lethargic demeanor at the end of the long,
hard dry season struck me yet again.
The first elephants we saw were peripheral families—the BCs,
HBs, and JBs—who had apparently made a beeline to the cen¬
tral swamps once the rains had come, knowing that the central
elephants either would be gone or would tolerate them. I did not
stop to census them but drove on. We next saw the BBs, whose
matriarch, the improbable and wonderful-looking Big Tuskless,
had sadly died earlier in the year. I noted that everyone was there
plus their close bond-group members, the UAs, led by Ulla. I
could not yet decide whether Barbara or Bette (another tuskless)
was taking over the role of matriarch. Then we came upon a
group just emerging from a patch of suaeda bushes. I saw that it
was the TCs and TDs and was tempted to keep going but stopped
because Tallulah was hurrying, running, and I thought they
might have been disturbed by something. They were not. Tal¬
lulah, usually acting the dignihed matriarch these days, was
playing. My notes read:
0850 Hurrying along on S. side, covered in mud, Tallulah
and her two calves and Theo’s ’82. These four are being
silly—floppy running, then beating through suaeda bushes,
pirouetting around, heads up, tails curled. Theo stays calm.
Tallulah picks up a log and throws it, then backs over to it
and kicks it. Tao just as silly.
0855 Behind them come Slit Ear and family, more digni¬
fied. At the back is Tess with a brand new baby—still pink
behind the ears but walking well. Would guess it was born
yesterday, on Christmas day.
My visitor was delighted. He had not realized that adult
elephants played like that. I was equally delighted, for more
complicated reasons. It was the second time I had seen the TD
females playing that year. On an earlier occasion I had watched

EPILOGUE

Theodora cavorting in the swamp in about five feet of water.
She smacked the water and swished her trunk about, splashing
and making waves. She sat down and raised her head into the
air and flopped over on her side, submerging herself com¬
pletely before finally coming up with vegetation strewn about
her head and tusks. Then she started gently sparring with little
Slo and they chased each other through the muddy water and
thick vegetation for another ten minutes. That time and again
on this day I felt a surge of joy for them. Tallulah and
Theodora, after more than two years, seemed to have recovered
from Teresia’s death, and they were once again the sprightly,
often whimsical elephants that I remembered and loved so
much. They were always my favorite young females, as much as
I tried to be impartial. Seeing them healthy and active and
playful gave me hope for their future and for the future of the
other Amboseli elephants as well.
And Tess’s little calf with her bright-pink ears and tiny wiggly
trunk was the future right there. Would she grow up in relative
peace and freedom? Would she have the tremendous good
fortune to have her mother and even her grandmother around
in 13 or 14 years’ time, when she had her first calf? I hoped so,
and on a beautiful clear bright morning with the snows of
Kilimanjaro glistening in the sunlight, I believed it was possible.
A few days later, at the end of 1986, with a mixture of both
hopes and fears for them, I recorded the status of the Ts. (In
keeping with our policy of naming calves when they reached
four years old, I gave the four ’82 calves names. I called Tonie’s
calf Truman after a botanist friend of ours, Tara’s calf Turner
at the request of one of the donors to the project, Tess’s calf
Tamsin after another friend, and Theo’s calf Tebald for no
particular reason except the first three letters made a unique
code. At nearly five years old Tamsin still had no tusks and so
the Ts had another tuskless.) In all, the three families in the
bond group consisted of 22 animals, close to the same number
as when I first saw them 13 years before, in 1973. There were
also five T males out in the population biding their time until
they could start siring offspring: Teddy, Tim, Tolstoy, Right
Fang, and Toby. Most of the original adults were gone, but
their descendants were definitely carrying on:

323

ELEPHANT MEMORIES

*

ta

Tuskless (62)
C’84
Tuo (80)
Tonie (67)
Truman (82)
Tilly (70)
C’83
Tom (79) [ex-TB]

9
$
6
$
6
9
6
6

tc

Slit Ear (36)
C’83
Slo (80)
Tabitha (76)
Tara (67)
Turner (82)
Tess (62)
C’86
Tamsin (82)

9
9
9
9
9
6
9
9
9

td

Tallulah (63)
C’83
Tao (80)
Theodora (67)
Tebald (82)

Osi +0 40 +o +o

324

Amboseli Elephant
Research Project
Publications
Croze, H. J., Hillman, A.K.K., and Lang, E. M.
1981. Elephants and theireach other. Dynamics of Large
Mammal Populations (ed. C. W. Fowler). New York: John
Wiley, 297-316.
Douglas-Hamilton, I., Hillman, A.K.K., and Moss, C. J.
1981. Notes on vertical photography of elephants for age
determination. ILCA Monographs, 4:131—142.
Lee, P. C.
1986. Early social development among African elephant
calves. National Geographic Research, 2:388-401.
1987. Allomothering among African elephants. Animal Be¬
haviour, 35:278-291.
In review. Family structure and its effects on female repro¬
ductive effort. Comparative Socioecology of Mammals and Man
(eds. V. Standen and R. Foley). Oxford: Blackwell Scientific
Publications.

325

AMBOSELI ELEPHANT RESEARCH PROJECT PUBLICATIONS

Lee, P. C., and Moss, C. J.
1985. Early maternal investment in male and female African
elephant calves. Behavioural Ecology and Sociobiology, 18:
353-361.
Lindsay, W. K.
1982. Habitat selection and social group dynamics of Afri¬
can elephants in Amboseli, Kenya. M.Sc. thesis, University
of British Columbia, 200 pp.

1983. Elephants, trees, and people. Wildlife News, 18(2):
8-11.

1986. Elephant problems and human attitudes. Swara, 9(3):
24-27.

1986. Trading elephants for ivory. New Scientist, 112(1533):
48-52.

In review. Food intake rates and habitat selection in ele¬
phants in Amboseli, Kenya. Proceedings of the Interna¬
tional Symposium on African Wildlife. Uganda Institute of
Ecology, Kampala.

In prep. Feeding behaviour and ecology of African ele¬
phants in Amboseli National Park, Kenya. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Cambridge.
Lindsay, W. K., and Mungai, M. E.

In prep. A test of the dropping count method for estimating
elephant density in Amboseli National Park, Kenya.
Moss, C. J.

1977. The Amboseli elephants. Wildlife News, 12(2):9—12.
1978. A family saga. Swara, 1 (1):34—39.
1980. What do you do with a 300-pound nose? International
Wildlife, May-June, pp. 36-39.
1981. The two and only. Animal Kingdom, 83(6):25-27.
1981. Social circles. Wildlife News, 16( 1):2—7.

AMBOSELI ELEPHANT RESEARCH PROJECT PUBLICATIONS

1982. Portraits in the Wild: Behavior Studies of East Africa
Mammals (second edition—revised). Chicago: The Univer¬
sity of Chicago Press, 371 pp.

1983. Oestrous behaviour and female choice, in the African
elephant. Behaviour, 86(3/4): 167-196.

In prep. Flexibility in the social system of the African
elephant.

In prep. The demography of the elephant population of
Amboseli National Park, Kenya.
Moss, C. J., and Poole, J. H.
1983. Relationships and social structure of African ele¬
phants. Primate Social Relationships (ed. R. A. Hinde), Ox¬
ford: Blackwell Scientific Publications, 315-325.
Payne, K. B., Poole, J. H., and Langbauer, Jr., W. R.
In prep. Infrasonic calls in free-ranging African elephants:
a possible long distance communication network.
Poole, J. H.
1982. Musth and male-male competition in the African
elephant. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge, 158 pp.

1987. Elephants in musth, lust. Natural History, 96 (II):
46-55.

1987. Raging bulls. Animal Kingdom, 90 (6): 18-25.
In press. Rutting behaviour in African elephants: the
phenomenon of musth. Behaviour.

In press. Honest advertisement of intent: the aggressive
state of musth in African elephants. Animal Behaviour.

In prep. Guarding behaviour in African elephants.
Poole, J. H., Kasman, L. H., Ramsay, E. C., and Lasley, B. L.
1984. Musth and urinary testosterone concentration in the
African elephant (Loxodonta africana). J ournal of Reproduction
and Fertility, 70: 255—260.

327

AMBOSELI ELEPHANT RESEARCH PROJECT PUBLICATIONS

Polle, J. H., Payne, K. B., Langbauer, Jr., W. R., and Moss, C. J.

In review. A sample of very low frequency calls from
free-ranging African elephants: their social context and
possible role in long distant communication.
Poole, J. H., and Moss, C. J.
1981. Musth in the African elephant, Loxodonta africana.
Nature, 292: 830—831.
Western, D., and Lindsay, W. K.
1984. Seasonal herd dynamics of a savanna elephant pop¬
ulation. African Journal of Ecology, 22: 229—244.
Western, D., Moss, C. J., and Georgiadis, N.
1983. Age estimation and population age structure of
elephants from footprint dimensions. Journal of Wildlife
Management, 47(4): 1192-1197.
Young, T. P., and Lindsay, W. K.

In press. Role of even-age population structure in the
disappearance of Acacia xanthophloea woodlands. African
Journal of Ecology.

Index
AA family, 36, 58, 59-60, 83, 139,
201
African Wildlife Foundation, 55, 101,
190
aggression, 48, 150, 168, 236, 286,
312
within clans, 132
within family units, 132
individual variations in, 55, 60, 132,
133, 134, 285
of males in musth, 105—106,
108-109, 113, 114
Amboseli Lake, 49-50
Amboseli Lodge, 80, 177, 183-184
Amboseli National Park:
animal life in, 50-51, 198—199
climate of, 49—50
described, 15, 49
ecosystem of, 50-51, 74-75, 138,
237, 304, 308-309
elephant raiding in, 137, 139,
177-189, 257-258, 290
history of, 51-53, 221-222
name of, 49
plant life in, 50
population density of elephants in,
54, 79-80, 205, 240, 242, 308
population dynamics of, 229-254,
296
Andelman, Sandy, 197, 275—276, 279,
289,312
Asian elephants:
diseases of, 268—269
infrasound communication among,
313
musth in, 108—109, 110, 113
tusk distribution among, 223
baboons, 125, 198
Bad Bull (Ml26), 93-94, 96, 105,
106-107, 109, 111, 112-113, 115,
117, 118, 290
bathing:
in dust, 23
in mud, 22
with water, 45-46
BB (Big Tuskless) family, 78—79, 171,
218, 322
bond groups, 35, 38, 67, 77, 130, 131,
157, 159, 211, 288
Boulton, Mark, 238, 248
brain, weight of, 265
bubonic plague, 198
bull areas, 112, 113
bull elephants, see male elephants
Burundi, 299

calves:
adoption of, 86, 215
birth of, 145-160, 167-173, 231,
232-234, 238, 242, 244, 250-253
code system for, 160
death of, 57-58, 60, 83, 170, 172,
233, 240-241, 242, 252, 272,
274-275, 276, 293
designations for, 61
difficulty of learning to manage
trunks in, 161, 162, 163-165
drinking skills acquired by, 22,
164-165
in family units, 34, 161
feeding skills acquired by, 23, 44,
66-67, 163-164
intervals between births of, 58, 129,
136, 239-240, 241, 249, 250
maturing of, 34
mothers’ relationships with,
161-162, 232, 271
in mud wallows, 22, 165
newborn, 149-150, 152, 153-157,
160, 168, 172, 265
nurturing of, 27, 35, 45, 56-57, 142,
150, 152, 157, 159-160, 161, 162,
265
nutrition in first year of, 276
playful behavior of, 25—26, 165,
168-169
running gait of, 26
sex differences in, 165—169
sex ratio of, 244
sounds made by, 26, 45, 153, 156,
162, 166, 232, 316
stillborn, 170
suckling of, 32, 44, 58, 86, 150, 152,
153, 154-156, 157, 164, 165,
166-167, 168, 172, 231-232, 266
survivorship of, 243—244, 268
temporal-gland secretions of, 110
twins, 167-169, 224
vulnerability of, 83, 137
weaning of, 58, 167, 231—232, 265
cardiovascular disease, 268
Central African Republic, 294, 295
Chad, elephant population in, 294
charging, 72, 85, 187, 261
Cheney, Dorothy, 197
circling, 45, 70, 85, 125, 128, 171
CITES (Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora), 297, 299
clans, 76, 132, 134
climbing, 44, 163, 165
Clutton-Brock, Tim, 166

330

INDEX
communication:
gestural, 23, 24, 25, 26, 35, 43, 66,
69, 97, 232
infrasound, 313-315
vocal, 23, 24, 35, 66, 72, 98,
121-122, 127, 313-315
see also elephants, sounds made by;
specific body parts

consortship, 95, 97, 100, 116, 117, 136
Croze, Harvey, 31-38, 54, 55, 75, 77,
78, 79, 80, 94, 101, 108, 109, 113,
138, 220, 246
background of, 30
Cumming, David, 296
DA and DB families, 130, 132, 151,
215-216, 280
daily routine of elephant herds, 21-28,
31
death:
accidental, 268
burial gestures and, 74, 270
of calves, 57-58, 60, 83, 170, 172,
233, 240-241, 242, 250, 252, 271,
272, 274, 276, 293, 296
as concept, elephants’ recognition of,
270-271
“garbage-related” causes of, 274
grieving behavior and, 74, 170,
270-271
by human beings, 267
by malnutrition and starvation, 267
of matriarchs, 214, 216, 266, 271
of mother in calving, 234
natural causes of, 267-269
nurturing and, 73-74
tabulation of, 239
defecation:
in greeting, 24, 128
after sleep, 23, 27, 148
dominance:
within family unit, 55
between family units, 69, 312
in male-female relations, 135
among males, 112, 114, 115, 116, 220
sparring and, 220
between subpopulations, 133, 134
Douglas-Hamilton, Iain, 29, 30, 34, 35,
53, 99, 101, 103, 105, 106-107,
108, 110, 114, 131, 211, 240, 246,
293, 295, 296, 298, 310-311, 312,
316
drinking, 22, 71, 122, 164-165, 208
drought:
causes of, 49-50, 55
effects of, 55, 57-60, 99, 158, 211,
217, 218, 240, 242, 272, 274, 276,
307

of 1976, 41-61, 80, 222, 273, 274,276
of 1984, 257, 271, 272, 273-276
EA and EB families, 103, 104, 132,
167, 188, 270, 276
ears:
cooling of, 46
flapping of, 43, 45, 46, 48, 69, 85,
98, 116, 124-125, 128
folding of, for threatening, 69, 97,
132
for identification, 29
lifting and spreading of, in greeting,
35
pink, of newborns, 153, 157, 161, 172
signaling with, 23, 26, 43, 66, 69, 85,
97
sounds made by, 23, 27
spreading of, 35, 67, 69, 97, 114
tension of, in estrous posture, 94
waving of, in musth, 93, 113
“elephant grass” (Sporobolus consimilis),
65
elephant graveyard, myth of, 269—270
elephants:
age distribution in populations of,
248-250
attractiveness of, 31—32, 236
courting of, 28, 76-77, 237
cows killed by, 186
culling of, 264, 304, 306-308,
315-316
declining population of, 291, 292,
293, 294-295
East African populations of, 53, 291
foreign objects “disliked” by, 280
height of, 112
individual recognition of, 29-30, 102
injuring of human beings avoided
by, 186-187
intelligence of, 220
joy in, 125, 158
longevity of, 117, 267
Loxodonta africana, 237, 245
naming of, 36-37, 60-61, 101, 160
North African populations of, 291
pneumonialike disease among, 218,
268
protection of, for conservation, 292,
299-300
relationship of size to age in, 103,
112,245-248
South African populations of, 291,
293-294
strength of, 186
weight of, 112
West African population of, 291, 292
see also calves; female elephants;
male elephants; specific topics

INDEX
elephants, sounds made by, 43
alarm call, 72
bellowing, 26, 96
calves’ vocalizations, 26, 45, 153,
156, 162, 166, 232, 316
clicking (of tusks), 24, 124, 128
cracking (of ears), 27
groaning, 95, 261
growling, 153
grundng, 45
humming, 162
low-frequency (infrasound),
313-315
during mating, 92-93, 94-95, 96,
100, 116, 315
moaning, 96
during musth, 113
rasping (of ears), 23, 122
rumbling, see rumbling
screaming, 24, 26, 72, 96, 124, 128,
166, 232,316
sluffing (of feet), 21
squealing, 26
trumpeting, 24, 26, 48, 86, 98, 123,
124, 125, 128, 142, 171
Enkongo Narok swamp, 31, 33, 57, 76,
77, 105, 122, 132, 133, 205, 208
Estella, 127, 167-169, 224
estrous behavior, 94, 100
estrus, 70, 136, 220
absence of external signs of, 99
age for onset of, 96, 265
pattern of, 100, 109
synchrony of, 129

FA family, 57, 76, 214
family units, 161
antipredator benefits of, 56
associations between, see social rela¬
tionships
designations for, 36
dominance in, 55, 69, 312
family units (cont.)
drought as cause of disruption of,
56, 217, 218
extended, see bond groups
flexibility vs. stability in, 211-220
fusion of, 218
makeup of, 34, 79-80, 212
number of (in Amboseli), 79
nurturing of wounded members by,
73
size of, 35, 79-80, 131, 216
splitting off of, 131, 214, 217-218,
271
vocal encouragement of mating by,
92-93, 94-95, 96, 100

feeding, 22-23, 25, 27, 31, 43-44, 71,
122, 123, 148, 205, 258
ecosystem and, 306, 308-309
as learned behavior, 23, 44, 66-67,
163-164
during pregnancy, 266
see also food
feet:
in feeding, 25, 43, 44, 164
size of, age indicated by, 246
swinging of, indecision indicated by,

122
female elephants:
age of, at birth of first calf, 34, 128
conception rates of, 241
delay in maturing of, 241
in family units, 34
growth rate of, 247
as leaders, 21, 23, 24, 27-28, 34
length of, 247
life cycle of, 265-267
mates selected by, 116-118, 315
maturity of, 34, 96, 128, 224, 241
odor of, 110
puberty of, 239-240, 251
size of, 112, 247, 265, 266
survival rate of, 136, 166
wariness of, in mating, 100
see also matriarchs
food:
Acacia nubica trees, 122, 208
Acacia xanthophloea trees, 25, 44, 121,
123,308-309
Balanites glabra trees, 122, 208
bananas, 178
Cynodon dactylon grass, 22, 44, 66
“elephant grass” (Sporobolns consimilis), 65
fruit and vegetables, 179-180
garbage, 80, 139, 179, 183-185, 205,
257-258, 274, 290
grasses, sedges, and herbs, 22-23,
66, 123, 164, 221
handouts, 80
palm trees, 121
Sporobolns species of grasses, 65, 66,
148
stolen from human beings, 178-180
swamp vegetation, 221
Fuller, Melanie, 190

Garda Marquez, Gabriel, 37
Garst, Warren and Genny, 181, 182
Georgiadis, Nick, 246, 247
gestation period, 136, 249
“green penis syndrome,” 104, 108

331

332

INDEX
greeting, 68, 93:
among family-unit members, 35, 69,
98, 127-128
by groups, 24, 124—125, 127, 130
Hauser, Marc, 277
head:
butting of, 165
lifting and turning of, 24, 35, 93, 94,
113, 124, 128
lowering of, in charging, 72
shaking of, 27, 48, 85, 207
Henry, Wesley, 191-196
Hinde, Robert, 110
IA and IB families, 200—201, 285
IUCN (International Union for the
Conservation of Nature and Natu¬
ral Resources), 293, 295, 296
ivory, price of, 292
ivory poaching, see poaching; tusks
ivory trade, 290-293, 296, 297-300
Jensen, Cynthia, 197, 199
Kenya:
culling of elephants in, 306-307
human population growth in,
300-301
independence of, 52
national-park policy of, 306
poaching in, 54, 295, 316
Kenyatta, Jomo, 52
Kilimanjaro Mountain:
in ecosystem, 49-50
elephant population of (Kili
elephants), 236-237, 310
Kimana swamp, 78, 236, 302
Kioko, Christina, 193, 194, 226
Kioko, Joe, 183, 188, 192-193, 194,226
LA and LB families, 71, 214, 217, 285
lactation, 86, 141, 172
Lasley, Bill, 114
Laws, Richard, 167-168, 239-240,
241,245-246, 307
Lee, Phyllis, 138, 142, 165, 166, 181,
182, 192, 196-197, 225-226, 237,
246, 247, 251, 252, 262, 263, 272,
273-277, 278
Lindsay, Keith, 138-139, 142,
208-209, 210, 220, 221, 225-226,
237, 246, 251, 262, 263, 272-277,
278, 279, 308
lions, 33, 47-48
Longinye swamp, 60, 67, 76, 80, 122,
124, 132, 133, 183, 205, 208, 223,
258

Maa (Maasai dialect), 28, 31, 49, 206
Maasai, 52, 53, 55, 186, 206, 210, 259,
260-261, 263, 271
bubonic plague among, 198
elephants’ wariness of, 27, 45, 46,
48, 70, 122, 207, 222, 232
as farmers, 78, 209, 301-302
history of, 51, 74, 189, 221
hunting fees collected by, 303
language of, 28
as pastoralists, 51, 59, 189, 209, 301
as poachers, 54
spearing of game as political protest
by, 53, 59, 244
as warriors (moran), elephants killed
by, 51, 244, 272, 274
male elephants:
in bull areas, 112, 113
as calves, 83, 137, 165, 268, 275
“casual walk” of, 70
described, 24—25, 70, 93
females inspected by, 25, 32, 70, 92
fighting for mates by, 97, 114—115
growth rate of, 166-167, 247
height of, 112
independence of, 101, 112, 125,
137,200-201
juvenile, sparring by, 25—26, 68—69,
106, 133-134, 220
maturity of, 34, 69-70, 93, 101, 112,
125
in musth, see musth
number of, in Amboseli population,
136
odor of, 25, 93, 104
six age classes of, 112
survival rate of, 136, 166, 237-238,
275
weight of, 188
mambas, black, 198-199
Martin, Esmond Bradley, 297
Martin, Rowan, 211-212, 314
Masaku (camp worker), 181, 182, 183,
193-196, 197, 199, 200, 27B-277,
281
mating, 70, 89-118, 136, 220
chasing in, 91, 94, 96, 100, 116, 117
consortship in, 95, 97, 100, 116, 117
between different populations, 236
duration of copulation, 94
females’ selection of mates in,
116-118, 315
frequency of copulation, 95
musth in, see musth
matriarchs:
death of, split in family group
caused by, 214, 216, 271
grandmother role of, 157
leadership by, 34

INDEX

rivalry of, 69
succession pattern for, 266
tracking of, 75
tusks of, 219
Maundu (park worker), 193, 194
menopause, 170-171, 172, 252
migration, 54, 63-88, 122
determination of patterns of, 74-76
flexibility in, 203-211, 221-222
“French holidays” in, 208
immigration, 78, 203, 216
Moss, Cynthia:
Amboseli site selected by, 53, 54,
189-190
book’s methodology explained by,
16-17
first encounter with elephant family
by, 28, 31
methodology of, 29, 30, 101, 102,
159,235,237,246-247
papers published by, 110, 116, 247
pet cat owned by (Moshi), 197-200
mud wallows, 22, 165
musth, 93', 108-118, 135, 136, 220, 315
age of onset of, 112, 117
evolutionary theory of, 111-112
paternity determination and, 129
signs of, 113
testosterone levels in, 109, 113, 114,
117
Mwanga (camp worker), 197, 276
Myers, Norman, 237, 248, 266-267
Namalog swamp, 78, 206-207, 209,
222,236, 258-261
Nature, 110
New York Zoological Society, 158
Ngande, Peter Kumu, 277, 321
Njiraini, Norah, 312
Nkurupe, Daniel, 263
nurturing:
of calves, 27, 35, 45, 56-57, 142, 150,
152, 157, 159-160, 161, 162, 265
of females in labor, 148, 233-234
ineffective, 153-156
of wounded elephants, 73
Oguya, Bob, 188
Ol Tukai Orok woodlands, 28, 60, 76,
121, 123, 132, 183, 185, 189, 190,
196, 258, 269
ovulation, 115, 117, 136, 172
PA, PB, and PC families, 67, 131, 140,
214, 225, 251
parasitic diseases, 269
penis:
dribbling of urine from, 25, 93, 103,
104, 105, 108, 110, 113, 116

erect, described, 94
green, 25, 93, 104-105
length of, 94
in mating, 92
Pilgram, Tom, 297-298
play behavior, 85-86, 142-143, 163,
165, 168-169, 171, 322-323
poaching, 54, 72, 80, 135, 219, 222,
235, 238, 241, 244, 264, 267, 268,
294-300, 307, 316
polygyny, 112, 165-166
Poole, Bob, 101-102
Poole, Joyce, 101-104, 108-116, 138,
150-151, 153, 158-159, 167, 170,
197, 224, 225, 226, 237, 246, 248,
251, 268, 275, 276, 279-281, 289,
312-313, 317
infrasound studies of, 313, 314, 315
musth theories of, 111-113
pregnancy, 136, 141, 143, 266
QA and QB families, 87, 215-216
raiding behavior, 137, 139, 177-189,
257-258, 290
reproductive behavior:
flexibility in, 239-240, 250
see also calves; mating
Right Fang, 32, 38, 39, 44, 61, 67, 69,
88, 126, 129, 143, 150, 157, 173,
201, 209, 210, 222-223, 227, 253,
258, 276, 289, 321, 323
rumbling, 23, 24, 25, 27, 35, 45, 48,
65, 66, 69, 70, 71, 98, 116,
124-125, 127
as contact call, 121-122
in greeting, 128
of newborns, 156
post-copulatory, 95, 96, 315
running:
“floppy,” 26, 171
panic, 27, 45, 171
Saiyielel, Soila, 312
Schaller, George, 158—159
Seyfarth, Robert, 197
Short, Roger, 99
Shorter, Brian, 170
Shorter, Clare, 170
Sikes, Sylvia, 268
skin, thickness of, 87, 161, 261
sleeping, 23, 27, 67
Slit Ear, 21, 24, 27-28, 29, 31, 32, 33,
37, 38, 39, 43-48, 55-56, 60, 61,
65, 69, 73, 80, 81, 87-88, 91, 96,
121-122, 124, 141, 143, 148, 149,
152, 157, 159, 160, 171, 173,
205-206, 207, 208, 209-210, 222,

333

334

INDEX
Slit Ear (cont.)
223,231-234, 248, 253, 258, 259,
260, 281, 322, 324
social relationships of, 126-130,
132-137, 212, 213, 285-289
Slo, 160, 173, 227, 231-232, 233, 253,
281, 285, 287, 290, 323, 324
snakebites, 268, 289
social relationships, 34-35, 67, 119-137
aggregations, 67, 211,217, 219, 220
bull areas, 112, 113
central vs. peripheral populations,
71-78, 132-133, 134, 243
tans, 76, 132, 134
consortship, 95, 97, 100, 116, 117
diagram of, 126
flexibility in, 211—220
groups, 216-217
of independent males, 112, 113,
134-136
kin groups, 34
sociability of elephants as factor in,
219-220
tactile activity, 35, 125, 127
see also bond groups; family units;
greeting
Somalia, 294
sparring, 165
dominance and, 220
fighting vs., 113
by juvenile males, 25-26, 68-69,
106, 123, 133-134, 163, 220
in mating, 92
between unequal partners, 163
among young males and females, 142
Sudan, 294
Tabitha, 173, 227, 231, 233, 234, 248,
253, 281, 285, 286, 289, 290,324
Tallulah, 38, 39, 45, 56, 61, 70, 73, 84,
86, 87, 88, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 121,
123, 124, 157, 158, 159, 160, 163,
173, 174, 227, 248, 254, 259, 260,
282, 286, 287, 289, 322, 323,324
mating of, 96-98, 100
pregnancy and calving of, 141, 143,
147-156, 232, 253
Tamar, 61, 88, 126, 129, 142-143,
149,157, 173,224-225, 227
death of, 232-234, 253
Tania, 31-32, 36, 37, 39, 55, 61, 65,
69, 73, 80, 83, 84, 85, 87, 88, 128,
130, 137, 140, 141, 142, 143, 156,
160, 173, 178, 179, 184, 186, 187,
213, 227, 231, 232, 248, 253, 257
death of, 273-274, 275, 281, 287, 288
Tanzania, 295
Tara, 61, 70, 88, 126, 129, 142-143,
149, 150, 152, 153-156, 157, 170,

173, 200, 209, 227, 233, 234, 254,
258, 281, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289,
323, 324
Teddy, 61, 67-69, 80, 83, 88, 128,
143, 173, 178, 179, 180, 184, 185,
200, 201, 213, 223, 289, 323
teeth:
abscessed, 267, 268
age indicated by, 245
for feeding, 164, 258
worn, starvation caused by, 267
temporal-gland secretions, 149, 157,
172
in calves, 110
in greeting, 24-25, 98, 125
in locating absent family members,
98, 110, 124
in musth, 93, 105, 108, 110, 113, 116
odor of, 110
Teresia, 21, 23, 24, 27, 28, 29, 31, 37,
38, 39, 44, 45, 46, 48-49, 55-56,
60, 61, 65, 69, 71, 73, 74, 76, 80,
81, 83, 87, 88, 91, 98, 121-125,
128, 130, 137, 143, 147, 148,
170-172, 174, 200, 205-207, 208,
213, 222, 227, 234, 247, 248, 252,
254, 258, 259, 290
death of, 260-264, 274, 275, 281,
287, 288, 289, 323
life of, as paradigm for life cycle of
female elephant, 265—267
Tess, 38, 39, 44, 56, 70, 88, 124, 126,
129, 141, 143, 149, 157, 170, 173,
209, 227, 248, 254, 259, 282, 285,
286, 287, 289, 290, 322, 323, 324
testosterone, 109, 113, 114, 117
T families, 37, 38-39, 60-61, 80, 83,
87, 88, 118, 132, 137, 142, 150,
157, 159, 171, 173-174, 188, 200,
201, 205, 218, 226-227, 231,
253-254, 281-282, 323-324
migration of (1977), 65-71, 76
in 1984 drought, 273-276, 281
social relationships within, 126-130,
218,285-290
TA, 38-39, 61, 88, 128, 130, 139,
143, 170, 173, 183, 184, 188, 189,
200, 205, 213, 218, 224, 226, 253,
257-258, 274, 281, 286, 288, 324
TB, 39, 61, 88, 128, 130, 139, 143.
173, 184, 188, 189, 200, 205, 213,
218, 224, 227, 253, 257-258, 275
TC, 39, 61, 88, 126-127, 128, 130,
143, 172, 173, 188, 201, 205,
207-210, 212-213, 218, 223, 227,
232, 253-254, 25B-259, 263, 276,
281-282, 285-288, 290, 322, 324
TD, 39, 61, 88, 121-125, 128, 130,
143,172, 174, 188, 205, 207-210,

INDEX

213, 218, 223, 227, 232, 254,
258-259, 263, 282, 287-288, 290,
322,324
Theodora (Theo), 56, 61, 70, 88, 98,
121, 123, 124, 142-143, 148, 149,
152, 157, 170, 172, 173, 174, 209,
227, 254, 259, 260, 267, 282, 286,
287, 289, 322, 323,324
Thompson, Garth, 315
Thomson, Joseph, 51, 309
threatening postures, 48, 69, 97, 114,
132,135
mock, 85, 142-143
Tia, 38, 39, 43-44, 56, 74, 88, 124,
126, 127-129, 14J 143, 156-157,
159, 160, 173, 20y, 210, 213,
222-223, 227, 231-232, 234, 253,
254,258
death of, 275, 276, 281, 287
mating of, 91-96, 116-117, 118
ticks, 27, 269
Tilly, 61, 70, 80, 84, 88, 128, 142, 143,
157, 170, 173, 178, 179, 224-225,
226, 232, 253, 281, 289, 321, 324
Tim, 61, 67, 88, 121, 123, 143, 173,
174, 201, 223, 224, 226, 289, 321,
323
Tolstoy, 61, 67, 88, 121, 123, 143, 173,
174, 227, 254, 260, 266, 281, 290,
323
Tom, 142, 143, 157, 159-160, 162,
173, 227, 231, 232, 253, 273, 275,
281, 286, 288, 321, 324
Tonie, 38, 39, 61, 70, 80, 84, 88, 128,
142, 143, 157, 170, 173, 178, 179,
224, 226, 250, 253, 281, 286, 287,
288, 289, 290, 321, 323, 324
Torn Ear, 29, 31, 33, 37, 38, 55, 56,
60, 61, 65, 66, 69, 73, 80, 81, 84,
87, 128, 130, 248, 253
death of, 71-72, 184, 288
trunk:
for bathing, 23, 45—46
for drinking, 22, 164-165
for dust baths, 23
entwining of, 24, 68, 114, 124, 128
for examination of dead elephants,
270-271
exchanging of, 127
for exploration of environment, 150,
152, 153, 161
for feeding, 22-23, 25, 43, 44, 164
for greeting, 24, 25, 27, 68, 128
for hooking leg of mother, 232
for mud wallows, 22
for nurturing touching, 27, 45
objects lifted with, 26, 27, 162

raising of, in musth, 113
for scratching, 27
for sniffing of ground, 98, 161
for sniffing of wind, 24, 25, 26-27,
45, 71, 83, 161
for social touching, 35, 48
for sparring, 26, 114
for spraying water, 46, 85
for threatening, 48
for “thumb-sucking” by calves, 161
trypanosomiasis, 269
Tuskless, 31, 33, 37, 38, 56, 61, 80-81,
83, 84, 87, 88, 128, 130, 140, 142,
143, 156, 159, 160, 173, 213, 226,
248, 253, 281, 286, 287, 288, 289,
321, 324
as garbage eater and raider, 80, 137,
139, 177-181, 182, 183, 184, 185,
186, 187-188, 189, 257
tusks:
absence of, 223
age for eruption of, 223-224
clicking of, in greeting, 24, 124,
128
for feeding, 25
for fighting, 114-115
growth rate of, 298
for identification, 29
size of, male vs. female, 135, 298
size of, poaching and, 219, 295
as source of ivory, 291
in sparring, 26, 68, 114, 123
twins, 167-169, 224
“twisting disease,” 269
Uganda, 294, 295, 298, 306
umbilical cord, 150, 154, 157, 172
United Arab Emirates, 299
urination:
of females, males’ interest in, 25, 70,
117
in greeting, 24, 93, 125, 128
after sleep, 23, 27, 148
see also penis
VA family, 36, 67-68, 85, 105, 150,
172
Western, David (Jonah), 30, 74-75, 76,
138-139, 158, 190, 196, 197, 220,
221, 235, 237, 246, 247, 296,
297-298, 308-309
Weyerhaeuser, Rick, 218, 311
Wild, Kingdom, 181
wounds, healing of, 87, 261
zebras, 46, 47

335

About the Author
After graduating from Smith College and working as a
reporter/researcher for Newsweek, Cynthia Moss moved to
Africa in 1968. Since then, while holding a variety of jobs
and titles, she has devoted herself to the study of elephant
life. Currently Director of the Amboseli Elephant Research
Project, Senior Associate of the African Wildlife Founda¬
tion, Kenya, and Research Associate at the Sub-Depart¬
ment of Animal Behavior at Cambridge University, she has
published numerous scientific papers and popular articles
in magazines such as Smithsonian and Nature; received
grants from the African Wildlife Foundation and the New
York Zoological Society; and is the author of Portraits in the
Wild. In 1985 she received the Smith College medal for
alumnae achievement. Her work has been featured on the
half-hour Wild Kingdom TV show and on ABC news in a
Roger Caras report; and she has been interviewed and
filmed by David Hartman for ABC’s Good Morning America.

“Ms. Moss has made a substantial contribution to our
knowledge of elephant life....One is soon swept away by
this ‘Babar’ for adults. By the end, one even begins to
feel an aversion for people. One wants to curse human
civilization and cry out ‘Now God stand up for elephants!’”
Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

Jfre J\Jew York Times ■*»*»*»»*»■
African elephants are the largest living land
mammals, weighing up to 12,000 pounds. They grow
throughout their long lives, maturing slowly—as
slowly as humans—and forming deep, lifelong
relationships. For these and other reasons, they
are among the most fascinating creatures on earth
and among the most difficult to study.
Cynthia Moss has lived with the elephants in
Kenya’s Amboseli National Park for twenty years,
spending many hours with them almost every day.
In this riveting book, she writes about her closest
elephant friends—the regal matriarchs Teresia and
Slit Ear; their younger female relations Tom Ear,
Tuskless, Tallulah, Tania; and the great bull
elephant, Bad Bull. With her we observe the daily
drama of their closely knit lives: the search for
food and joyful reunions after even a few days apart;
the excitement of elephantine mating and birth;
the struggle against drought, disease, poachers, and
tourism; the elaborate vocalizations and riotous
play; the poignant ways they remember their dead.
For animal lovers and anyone concerned with the
preservation of wildlife, Cynthia Moss has written
an extraordinary chronicle. Elephant Memories is
nothing less than an impassioned plea for the
elephants’ continued survival.

Cover printed in USA

ISBN 0-44T-^D3bE-l

